to launch the book and asked me if
influence which you can also see on the
screen written by Thomas Daniel with a
foreword by Thomas Weaver and an
afterword by pizza cook the book
contains an incredible collection of
texts and images to bring to light the
theory and practice of twelve leading
architects from Japan as well as the
intellectual social economic political
and technological forces from the time
and place in which they were produced
the book is in a publication and it was
edited by Sara Handelman and designed by
Boris myself from our pen studio and but
it was actually born out of a series of
articles edited by Pamela Johnston and
commissioned by Thomas Weaver for a
files it wouldn't have been possible
without the generosity of the architects
and their estates for providing us with
the amazing material that you'll see
within the pages of the book as well as
the support from the Sasakawa foundation
and the Graham foundation to make this
project into a reality the talk tonight
will start with a presentation by it's
home Daniel about the book and the
architects featured within and will be
followed by a conversation between him
and Jeremy about these twelve twelve in
the midst of all careers as well as the
context of Japan and the importance of
biographical racing within architecture
after the talk we invite you all to
stick around and have a drink with us in
the South story room and also to buy a
copy of the book which is a Unseld for a
special price tonight as it's a launch
event of 36 pounds and I guess to
briefly introduce tonight's speakers Tom
Daniel is a professor of architectural
theory and criticism at Kyoto University
and is the foremost western expert on
the contemporary Japanese architecture
and Jeremy Taylor's an architect
educator and writer whose books have won
the RIBA President's Award for research
and he's currently the head of Central
Saint Martin's and pro vice-chancellor
of the University of Arts London so
without any further ado please join me
in welcoming them both today
thank you very much I don't have a
PowerPoint I'm gonna let the the pages
of the book automatically scroll through
in the background as I speak it's a
great pleasure to be here and I want to
express my deepest gratitude to the AAA
and its new director Ava French for the
invitation and of course for
commissioning and publishing the book -
Jeremy til for joining here tonight the
book itself comprises 12 biographical
portraits of post-war Japanese
architects based on interviews or
conversations and is illustrated with
archival drawings and personal photos
but almost no photos of actual buildings
there are a few of construction sites so
it's primarily a book about ideas as
expressed in words or manifested in
drawings and the purpose is to get
behind the scenes to understand the
internal motivations and the external
pressures and influences that inspired
the work it's taken a few years to
produce but in a sense it's been
underway for decades it's an outcome of
my personal fascination with a
particular community of creative
individuals and the privilege to
participate on the fringes of that
community during my time in Japan I'd
always been collecting interesting
anecdotes and interesting images but the
person who gave the impetus for turning
my bulging scrapbook into a real book
was Thomas Weaver at the time was head
of a publications who instigated and
published an a a files and various other
books the pieces that form the basis for
many of the chapters in the book his
faith in me and his generosity as an
editor have been essential and it's a
shame he couldn't be here tonight he's
in the Netherlands but he also
contributed a foreword that argues
convincingly for the importance of oral
history and biographical detail in
architectural writing the peerless Peter
Cook provided a wonderful afterward that
draws on his long experience as an
enthusiastic facilitator of dialogue
between the architectural avant-gardes
of Japan and the West great shame he
couldn't be here tonight either I think
he's in Spain I'm extremely grateful to
Sarah
woman who took over as editor partway
through production of the book and she
shepherded the book to completion with
exceptional insight precision and
patience and the graphic designer Barse
Meister produced a beautifully opposite
form for the content and put up with my
graciously put up with my endless
demands for changes I should also
mention Pamela Johnston who expertly
copied those texts that first appeared
in AAA files and outside the a a Cynthia
Davidson edited those texts the first
appeared in her journal log my thanks
also to the Graham Foundation and the
Sassicaia foundation for financial
support and above all I'm indebted
forever to the architects for sharing
their time and ideas and putting up with
the effrontery of my questions because
to be commenting on a culture other than
one's own and our hyper sensitive era is
obviously fraught territory delving into
the kind of controversial aspects of the
Japanese architectural world is a bit
like being a tourist with a credit card
I'll go wherever I want but there will
be a bill waiting when I get home and of
course Japan has been my home for about
the last 25 years but I always always
remain an outsider and a guest with all
of the privileges and restrictions that
implies and entails but my status as an
engaged outsider attempting to improve
intercultural understanding between the
architectural communities of Japan and
the West owes a debt to two pioneers
Peter Cook and Peter Eisenman who are
the two rocks upon which the current
relationship between those communities
has been built and both of whom appear
frequently throughout the book
now in his afterward Peter Cook writes
and I quote as architectural types Tom
Daniel and I couldn't be more different
he a consummate scholar and scavenger of
theoretical links and me an enthusiast
for stuff and things who only reach out
to theory of which I rapidly grow bored
if all else fails end quote and Peter's
not wrong about my theoretical
inclinations indeed I remember being
mildly true
dazed by the answer he gave to a
question from a student after a lecture
he gave in Japan a couple of years ago
he said something like there's always
some boring little guy in the back of
the room who wants to theorize
everything now Peter perhaps
underestimates my deep love of the stuff
of Japanese architecture of all of these
inexplicable drawings and models and
buildings and by extension the
inscrutable individuals who created them
but of course I'm being ironic when I
use words like inexplicable and
inscrutable because the mission of the
book is to explain the work and to
destroy the clich√© of inscrutability
which has become a kind of a lazy
cop-out when talking about the culture
of Japan and the Far East as a whole and
on that topic I would tip my hat to REM
koolhaas who is always somewhat
irritably challenged the tendency of
Japanese architects to frame their work
is the outcome of some kind of
mysterious unique cultural background
essential ice and therefore inaccessible
to outsiders and indeed colossus a
recent book on metabolism co-written
with Hans Ulrich Obrist also uses oral
history also uses conversations to get
beyond all of the contrived prepared
responses we usually see but my primary
model was the 16th century treatise by
Giorgio Vasari
titled lives of the artists which is a
foundational document for art history
and also uses biographical and social
context in order to explain the world so
without pretending to have the scope and
authority of a sorry
I have also tried to elucidate the
theory and practice of twelve Japanese
architects by asking about their
childhood experiences their personal
personal and professional relationships
their educational influences and their
employment history
now the sari was able to write an
intimate detail about the artists of his
time because he knew them personally
with one crucial exception he never met
Leonardo DaVinci who was the figure that
was central to his book and to his
argument and similarly I never met
kazeshini O'Hara because he passed away
in 2006 but he remains the protein
enigma around which much of the
discussion in the book revolves all of
the other profiles are based on long and
sometimes multiple conversations with
fair subjects and in some cases I used
these as the basis for essays which
allowed me to add historical background
and critical perspective but in most
cases they remain as conversation
transcripts albeit amended and condensed
if the content of the book contains more
gossip about architects than it does
scholarship about architecture this kind
of gossip is I believe essential to
fully understanding the architecture and
the times from which it emerged so the
speakers were all allowed to tell their
side of the story they were given enough
room and rope to vindicate or
incriminate themselves now the obvious
challenge with the scholarship on
Japanese architecture is the language
barrier outside Japan Japanese
architecture is usually understood
through poetic images through exquisite
drawings and photographs of buildings
that most people will never see in
reality maybe because they don't have
the chance to visit Japan certainly
because many of the important buildings
are private houses and therefore
inaccessible and also sadly because
Japanese architecture tends to have such
a short lifespan that many of the key
buildings have already been demolished
now all of the conversations were
conducted in Japanese and in translating
them into English I have tried to
capture the idiolect
the characteristic way of speaking of
each person but the stage directions
that is that is to say the laughter and
the facial expressions and the hand
gestures and so on world
to increase readability although at the
expense of the humor and the conflicted
emotions that characterized all of the
conversations the conversations and the
essays are supplemented by four
translated essays newly translated
essays by some of these architects by
Casso Shinohara Toyo Ito terranova
fujimori and Kyoshi say Takayama
and the intention is to give a sense of
the contemporaneous discourse of the
ways that each generation of Japanese
architects has absorbed and understood
and responded to the ideas of the
predecessors appears not to be sure
they're not always easy reading but then
they weren't always easy writing the
complexity of many passengers is partly
due to I think deliberate obscurity or
pretentiousness on the part of the
authors but also due to the inherent
ambiguity of the Japanese language
attempting to discern the overall shape
of their arguments sometimes felt like
exploring a hieroglyphic limestone
chamber with a cigarette lighter and
untangling the grammar of an individual
sentence could be like solving a Rubik's
Cube covered in fluctuating colors if
you hit upon just the right word in
English you can bring clarity to a whole
sentence or paragraph but in some cases
the incoherence lies in the original
text and this little that can be done
should be done to solve it now in some
cases the difficulties in understanding
these texts was due to the fact that
their products of their time so I added
footnotes to explain people and places
and cultural events that would have been
obvious to a Japanese reader but in a
sense the entire book is the work of
translation literally and metaphorically
it's an attempt to to draw a relational
picture to diagram an anatomy of
influence that suggests the complexity
of the Japanese architectural discourse
now the period covered spans from the
post-war decades
present-day but my emphasis is on the
radical change in our Japanese
architectural culture in this 1960s and
1970s two decades that are practically
polar opposites in Japanese history and
the reasons for this are basically
economic by 1968 Japan was the second
richest country in the world then in
1973 the oil crisis through the whole
country into a recession but the effects
on the Japanese architectural world were
ideological so whereas the 1960s was a
period of visionary grand urban schemes
based on the urgent need to rebuild a
war devastated nation and the
availability of seemingly endless funds
to do so the economic downturn of the
1970s accessor baited by escalating
environmental damage and by grassroots
political protests split the formerly
unified sense of mission into
innumerable personal obsessions in
concrete terms this is a shift from
envisaging envisioning rigorously
systematized urban plans to creating
introverted private houses from the
imitation of Western modernism to the
study of non-western vernaculars from
the demolition of historical buildings
to the documentation of forgotten
objects from rigid authorial control to
flexible user participation and from a
seemingly a modernist society to an
enthusiastic celebration of personal
differences among other things the 1960s
and 1970s were a golden age for
architectural journalism in Japan the
many magazines published during this
period cumulatively form a rich archive
my main archive for this book of
architectural design and discourse not
only did they introduce experimental
works and
they were also a platform for
theoretical writing and critical debate
so it may seem that Japanese architects
the text written by Japanese architects
on the works of their peers and their
predecessors might seem relatively
genteel in translation but read in the
original they are often quietly
lacerating in that the subtle Bob's
addressed the appears are kind of
concealed in the subtleties of the
language now of course given the
importance of discretion and respect and
hierarchy and so forth in Japanese
culture criticism is and was and is a
dangerous activity it could lead to
ostracism from the from the
architectural community and could damage
a budding career in the long term so
young architects who had the temerity to
write critical evaluations of their
elders would often do so anonymously or
under a pseudonym but in many cases they
would retrospectively reveal their
identities after they achieved a degree
of Fame and status and authority and
then their old texts will be reread with
new interest so people such as artists
of sake and King Akuma are examples of
this they wrote anonymously criticism
when they were young and later on
published that published that criticism
in anthologies revealing themselves to
being the authors so public criticism of
the work of others undoubtedly becomes
easier as one's own stature increases
but also over the decades I think that
critical writing has become more
accepted or less risky in Japan
nonetheless the importance of
maintaining civil relationships still
persists positive influence between
protegees and mentors and peers is much
more common than a kind of a critical
attack or critical rejection so in the
in Japanese traditional
disciplines the de Amato which is
usually translated as the Grandmaster
would pass on the secrets and skills of
their trade to their children and their
disciples and this is echoed in the
modern architectural profession the the
teacher supplies to teachers and
students as much as it does to employers
and employees but admittedly that
distinction is a little unclear because
many famous Japanese architecture design
professors will treat their University
studios as if they are extensions of
their office and they'll put their
students to work on real projects unpaid
so the typical the typical Korea the
early part of a typical career is spent
working for a guru who demands a total
commitment of time and energy
outrageous working hours for a tiny
remuneration and fealty to a personal
design agenda and Japanese offices and
the University studios like actors
incubators for guild like lineages that
perpetuate and refine an idiosyncratic
design technique and pass it on to the
next generation so when a young
architect leaves to establish their own
office these not very often will they be
some kind of ethical reactionary to pull
rejection of their former mentor instead
there'll be an ongoing engagement and
dialogue so deference paid to a senior
figure is balanced by a covert but still
very binding obligation for the senior
figures to support their juniors so the
famously overworked underpaid interns
that populate every Japanese
architecture office are not just gaining
professional skills but they're being
initiated into a community that's going
to sustain them for the rest of their
careers now given the complexity of this
web of influence making the final choice
of twelve architects from an ever
lengthening list of
candidates was difficult to say the
least as the chart of relationships
became larger and denser my wall became
covered with photos and maps and
magazine clippings and mug shots and
post-it notes all cross-referenced with
colored pushpins and string like a
police investigation into an organized
crime ring or a conspiracy theorists
attempt to prove the existence of a
secret world government so I first
limited the lists to architects over the
age of 60 and to make sure that their
career arc was clear and the historical
importance was beyond question and then
I chose a 12 architects who were within
the field occupied positions as far away
from each other as possible so they
thereby form a Zodiac of disciplinary
projects and each one of them plays a
specific role in defining the overall
scope so the amount of work left undone
is enormous but it would mainly be a
case of filling the gaps between these
12 nodes rather than expanding outward
into uncharted territory each of the
architects was given the raw transcript
of our conversation for checking so they
could correct any mr. speaker and miss
rememberings and they could augment
their anecdotes I also checked myself
for factual mistakes usually just names
and dates of places and buildings and
people and publications but revealing
errors I left undirected because it's
the largest story I'm trying to tell in
this book lies precisely in those errors
or those slips the same events the same
people and the same buildings reappear
throughout the book but what might seem
to be repetition is in fact difference
in that the point is not the large
overlaps in what these architects have
to say but in these small discrepancies
now as the more or less innocent
consequence of
differing opinions and subjective
experiences and a partial knowledge of
events these discrepancies are analogous
to a Japanese garden design technique
known as Mia cocoon it as you stroll
around the garden the same elements
revealed then hidden then revealed again
but against new backgrounds and from new
angles all of the stories collected in
this book exemplify what is known as the
Rashomon effect in the 1950 movie
Rashomon directed by Akira Kurosawa the
four main protagonists each tell the
same they each recount the same set of
events
none of them dispute that a samurai was
killed and his wife ravished by abandon
but they disagree on whether was murder
or suicide rape or seduction and
Kurosawa later admitted there was no
true version of the story there was only
multiple conflicting fictions motivated
by self-interest and ego because in oral
history every narrator is unreliable
memories are distorted by time nostalgia
grudges and wishful thinking
responsibility is assumed or denied
credit is given or taken rivals are
slandered scores are settled guilt is
ass waged reputations are protected and
legacies are consolidated and everything
is tempered by an instinctive loyalty to
one's own extended family now this makes
life easier and harder for the scholar I
don't vote for the truth of every
statement made in these conversations
only for the fact that my interlocutors
made those statements
[Applause]
okay so first of all congratulations to
do this and I did and it was just twelve
Japanese architects and I thought top of
my list which is both incredibly
scholarly it's beautifully written
it is beautifully produced continue to
make books of this quality it's a great
achievement it feels like it's a kind of
just want to eat I'm gonna read an
excerpt so this is an anecdote yep
drunkenness beginning to take over it
seems that I started to expound for many
years suddenly I noticed all those with
only work so far houses along with
corrosion ihara the usually heedless
drunken frenzy
uko for Tagawa looked as if he wanted to
punch
I took told them to take it outside but
they wouldn't Montezuma frustrated
himself on the floor and began to chant
some kind of incantation kicked him in
the butter it's a short temperate castle
who because up here sorry about this
happened with the disappearance of it's
just and I think that the sense of you
call it gossip as a form of writing of
collection revealing and also quite
funny but I do have some reservations
about it not about what you've done
but about
you knew before is that Hasegawa who is
great female architect was his official
doctor because he didn't have another
license so there are lots of little bits
like that which I think really
fascinating first of all maybe we could
just talk about history of architecture
being related as the history of the
individual hero and the sense that the
identification of the architect with
their building and this is I think how
you get away from it is the way the
history of architecture is shown and I
have huge problems with about that
because architecture the collaborative
attack the thing it writes out the
everyday if I had the user it writes out
culture works out politics it turns
architecture into this self-contained
discourse so I'm interested in about how
you you think that the book avoids the
notion of the mythology of architecture
being associated with the individual
hero
well I'm pathetic to the idea of the
individual hero then you are I know but
as no one would argue that architecture
is a collective process
sameer client and so forth and so what
the book tries to do is acknowledge the
incredible creativity of these
individuals but also talk about their
influences which is in the title of the
book so first of all it reveals that
their education their employment history
and their childhood experiences so on
more formative and influential in the
work they did that a lot of it came out
of discussions they were having with
their peers and it also reveals they
have feet of clay which is of course no
surprise and since then adequacy at
certain moments and also sense of
arrogance at certain moments but it
reveals them to be human beings and I
think this is particularly important in
the case of Japan where we get
linguistic reasons we get kind of a very
contrived version of events they story
they want you to hear is the one that
gets translated and it's all we have to
go on so the book really tries to reveal
the humanity of these people and the
fact that they really are an incredibly
interactive community
incredible influence between these
people as well as being creative in
themselves one of the things which
always with Japan as a culture set apart
you are a stranger after 25 years and we
never be accepted and there's a sort of
what often happens within sort of
curators you know those things Barbican
where it is about the Japanese house
there's actually trying to find the
Japan nests which is I think he's famous
essay of Japanese architecture is you
would feel pretty different difficult
but if I was gonna push you what what
would you how would you try to join the
link so that it satisfies the outside is
demand for a view of Japanese culture as
something which is which is connected
together would you deny would you say
actually I can't begin to do that the
twelve individuals were chosen precisely
to be as far apart from each other as
possible they reveal extremely different
incommensurate approaches on the other
hand I do think taking it from the
widest possible viewpoint there is
something unique and it does arise from
historical building culture which of
course takes a lot of its inspiration
from China but it like everything Japan
absorbs it becomes so
transformed in the process of being
absorbed it becomes Japanese let's say
so you have a simultaneous incredible
culture of imitation and incredible
culture of uniqueness those two aspects
of Japan in your head simultaneously you
can see where these sources are and you
can also see how unique it becomes one
of the things that is perhaps that's
well known but always needs to be
emphasized is that Japanese architecture
relies partly on the creativity of the
designers but a huge amount on the skill
of the builders ito for example will
always say construction in the industry
is so fastidious and so inventive they
will find a way to make it happen so a
lot of this stuff comes out of
interactions on-site with construction
workers who are really every single one
of them is somehow an artisan who was
absolutely dedicated to getting precise
results that every small aspect of the
building and the cumulative result is
unbelievably perfect buildings and a lot
of the detailed solutions and spatial
solutions may have come out of
negotiation with the Builder on-site
rather than the lone architect studio so
there's a sensibility that comes from
climate as
anywhere in the world comes from
cultural patents which also in a sense
can be traced back to climate and
geography and so forth and in the fact
that the construction industry is not
the opponent or kind of secondary to
what the architects to but right up
until the late 19th century there was no
such professional architect the people
who built the buildings were the people
who designed them everything was done by
carpenters so the bifurcation of of
course between thinks about buildings
happened very late in Japanese history
and therefore the relationship between
those two is still very close because if
you if you went to the Barbican
exhibition in one sentences people come
comes like god that's really weird isn't
it yeah yeah and there's a sort of that
people enjoy that weirdness but I think
weird is wrong actually because one of
the things that both Tom Weaver at the
beginning and Peter Cook says and is
absolutely astounding is the level of
intellectual intensity of Japanese
orchid architecture culture so that I
think
he's doing eight volumes of his work
seven of writing and one is of project
descriptions yep yes and it should be
noted there was a bridge that's a small
selection of his full body completely
alien to two particularly British
architectural culture so that in Peter
cooks because he likes ideas he doesn't
like the theorization about gears
because he thinks ideas should pop out
and be be fluid but that was to begin
with the sort of the beginning of not
beginning but a sign of the anti
intellectual culture which architecture
right cabooses cynjohn like little epi
bones
David chip there was very fluent on the
stage right so that we don't have that
sense of a kind of intellectual
intensity I mean the last time that was
was in the you know the late 70s in this
world where you actually got the
connection between you know when when
there was a kind of sense of that going
on but it simply doesn't so I just I
just liked to kind of reflect on how
important you think that is to the
production of it doesn't
yes they are all prolific writers and
it's one of the points that Peter Cook
makes in his afterwards he didn't
realize how prolific writers they were
but they will have multi-volume sets of
their essays every building when ito
when Ito makes a building what kuma
makes a building they'll write the
writer text about it beforehand during
and afterwards to explain work in
intellectual terms the texts in fact
they write so much that they can be
repetitive they can they're often making
the same because they think that younger
architects will only read the latest
book ever written I mean has to keep
making certain important points over and
over again and the intellectual ideas
behind the work but when they're quoting
Western thinkers I think it's fair to
say that in many cases these missed
readings or miss interpretations that in
some cases buzzwords to give a kind of
intellectual or to the work I think
kazeshini O'Hara was very guilty of
quoting let's say French philosophers in
a way that didn't necessarily show he
understood the work but he wanted to
make understood the philosophy made he
wanted to make his work seem
intellectually profound but and I think
that when Western writers will quote
Japanese philosophers they will make the
same mistakes but in fact it's more
interesting to see the way that these
Japanese architects draw on their own
intellectual traditions
the translation is all but impossible in
terms of transferring these ideas into
Manish because possibly the weirdness
comes out of this kind of intensity
which in some cases leads to a sense of
extreme abstraction because if you're
following through the kind of journey
and then the building is a sort of
manifestation of that journey then it's
not surprising that whatever come out
quite so the other thing which I get
about in your introduction I get
disturbed about I just I find it
complete
and in the morning you you will get one
meal a day I'm not saying that you
celebrate but don't seems uncomfortable
with it as I am and I just wonder how
necessary this it's it's really
completely out of order what they've
subject an intern to and and we get to
the sing-bad initiation that that that
it it appears to me to actually create
an unacceptable form of architectural
culture it's very controversial
and in terms of my first job 20 years
ago I worked for a week it changed my
life and I think no one is going to keep
doing that after they get married
to leave at 2:00 a.m. would be an easy
day there at the state of a night very
often yeah and it's crazy but the thing
to remember is there are people lining
up at the door because everyone wants to
be initiated into the cult and it's and
you say it's like education and recently
doing some pretty tough lectures on
education about the culturally and about
what happens in architecture education
is that you are initiated into the
culture sacrifice and then that is
played out in the profession which i
think has led to the marginalization
profession because no other profession
would allow itself to be abused as as
architects yep no other profession would
allow itself to be you know to cut their
fees or to have unpaid internships or
whatever to to the extent of
architecture so I'm Japanese model seems
to be within the states which is a rush
to the bottom in terms of you know if if
your internal economy depends on
sacrifice I people being unpaid or
working overtime has it led to rush the
bottom in terms of fees being cast in
the what kind of stuff all or to
Japanese architects said that they still
have the equivalent status of let's say
Swiss architects
then you can work much more conventional
office doing less boring work for more
money with shorter hours and in fact the
story I tell about Kengo kuma is that
when he was in school he studied under
Hiro shihara and Hiro shihara said you
must do this you must work 20 hours a
day and dedicate your entire existence
to architecture life well respected and
successful Architects in the world but
he acknowledged that problem with the
profession anyone studying the
architectural Association is probably
interested in that relationship between
and the mass is there any kind of
transference of that intensity or the
intellectual version the identities to
transfer is the 99% pretty much a
commercial machine ticking over which
allow but the culture is generated by
the 1% right so there's there's a
gradation of course there are levels of
experimental everyone's using the same
construction industry so polity is high
and it is true that people making that's
a cracked housing in Japan see
developments are clearly being inspired
by the very advanced development so I
see I see the very advanced offices like
race cars they're doing crazy
destructive expensive seemingly
pointless things but they develop the
technology and the ideas that then flow
down to the rest of the profession so
absolutely
these leading-edge offices which often
fail I mean let's say I don't want to
sing but failed terribly in terms of
structure and waterproofing and so on
but they show us where the limit is
knowledge they generate in doing that
the rest of the profession right because
I seem to say I don't think you could
use that quotation in the UK quite so
much one of the things that is sort of
interesting about about the story
architecture is a story architecture
clearly is the story the 1% but the
story of the city is the story the 99%
and so we're sort of we are overwhelmed
by the 99%
most of which is complete rubbish yeah
if there isn't the transference and yet
we believe in the 1% you know we still
take soccer foo-foo disease and we're
actually still going to be rescued by
that 1%
well it's extreme extremely creative
what inspires us and causes us to get up
in the morning and so forth look at
books and magazines and think Japan must
be full of amazing crazy architecture
everywhere you look those of you have
been and would say that's not so
different from most places in the world
it's interesting
Architects in the in female architects
and I just wondered about there's not it
has to go talks about it a bit I don't
think
Tsushima does and there's a story that
has to go so tell us about the best
Hayashi because so what's your reading
of the I mean Japan just recently in
medical school of the distortion of
records of female applicants and exams
that's being pushed down what do you
have any optimism about about patriarchy
in Japanese architecture in Japan as an
inspiration he's very very high
representation of female architects in
the one percent we're talking about in
advanced anyone looking at women and in
fact is any prejudice at all right now
it's in the favor of women architects
there's a great curiosity about what
female architects are doing
may lack ticks and I would say that
female architects in Japan experienced
no negative effects of being on a
construction site or a dealing with
clients and so forth I think the
situation for them right now is very
good that's good to hear because if one
takes I think use the word initiation
I've got it written down as well but
there is certainly in the book this
sense of the initiation that you it
starts within the university
laboratories you initiated into that you
take on your master etc etc but
presumably if there and that is a pretty
patriarchal system there's a very strong
sense of the father figure dominating I
mean you're talking about people over
six feet so that kind of historical
thing so you're suggesting that the
contemporary thing that sort of sense of
profound initiation is happening
received as a much more patriarchal
society that actually is there's really
very little gender discrimination in
terms of the way a female architect will
be perceived as a professor or as
practitioner I'm not saying it's perfect
but perhaps much it's much
√ßb okay the other thing which which I
was really struck by was and again I
think this is a historic thing possibly
interesting in stalkers is how didactic
these people are for hours he says my
training was rigorous it like a sport
and there's a kind of sense in some of
these particularly actually almost all
of them have a very didactic approach
this is the way to do it and you will
learn it like this is is that sense
still continuing absolutely so I think
this comes from the pre-modern
apprenticeship model where everything
was family guild lineages and who taught
exactly the way to do it
and in fact the the the teaching method
is often it's not really teaching in the
sense that the junior the apprentice or
the student
they'll learn through trial and error
rather than being taught the method
upfront and there's certain secret
secret techniques of in a pre-modern
trade of carpentry or paper making or
whatever particular trade we're talking
about in the current situation and is
there no pushback from students that
that's a sort of accepted model which
yes so students don't see themselves
again with huge generalization yet
students don't see themselves as let's
say rejecting or challenging their
teachers challenging the teacher is not
a not a common thing to do
psychologically very difficult thing to
do when you when you choose there's
Japanese architecture student will
choose the professor that they want to
follow and they really become a disciple
that person they chose a person whose
work they love and they learn to copy as
much as extended they take it on to the
next stage and you can see this very
clearly and generational lineages of
teacher and student of the way certain
bodies of work get refined he talked as
a g-man Sagami and so forth but your
book portrays I didn't leave this kind
of sense of I'd been in it and then I'm
certain some cases rejecting some case
of continuing it I think that that's a
really lovely word which comes out
when I was in short list it for the job
when got it it became quite apparent to
me that the more objectionable you were
the to to the more popular and it was
really it was really it was just
watching in absolutely why why are you
doing this students what the hell are
you
subjecting yourself to this brutality
it's kind of the weirdest thing but it
seems to be part of what is accepted as
and it's sort of good it clearly goes
back to the pose our only in Japanese
version and it for me looking sort of
mystification about why that still
happens well you don't think the
sequence is actually the opposite the
more brilliant and desirable the teacher
the more of a jerk they can be without
any consequences yeah the whole kind of
the cult is what's very nice about the
book is that it sets up the master but
also disassembles it through the moments
of fragility the moments of rejection
and stuff like that and that that's
quite for me was quite encouraged
actually because the mythology that you
have - you have to subscribe to the cult
of the master is something which I'm
really uncommon as you know I'm really
uncomfortable with and I think what the
book does is it sort of it disassembles
not a beautiful manner so that's
probably enough of me what time is it
thirty five so we've got what another
ten minutes for any any questions for
observations
are you asking about how that relates to
Japanese architecture offices office
when they're working until 2:00 a.m.
every night in fact they're not super
productive they're not super efficient
an awful lot of time seemingly gets
wasted but what's happening is the
people in the office are making
relationships the social interactions to
create a relationship that mean things
happen very very smoothly in an office
there are no kind of difficulties and
rivalries and people disliking each
other refusing to work with each other
the social relationships become so
smooth they socialize together after
hours as well as within the office that
the work gets done in a very very
efficient way without conflict but a
very inefficient way in terms of the way
time is used that probably doesn't help
you
someone to buy
I think that's always the case
and it's not necessarily Mis translation
from one language into another I think
that architects are having very already
complex about the intellectual quality
of what they do with basically we make
things it's kind of a trade rather than
a profession so architects are forever
trying to intellectualize they work by
quoting philosophers it's not a Japanese
phenomenon and the answer should be if
it interesting consequences and I think
even someone like Peter Eisenman admits
he miss reads philosophers and but
doesn't care about the fact of whether
he's actually interpreting them
correctly only that the consequences for
his architecture are useful so in the
case of Takamatsu lost was now we're
talking about British pop music but he
designed that sword before he knew the
song so I can I happened to know the
story there's a there was a guy working
in the office the young guy who was
really into British pop music during the
1980s and Takamatsu basically said I've
designed a sword what should I call it
and this guy said well I just heard this
great song and that's pretty much the
story and that's that's the level of
intellectual thought that went into it
but it is a nice poetic image and often
Japanese architects will seem to be
saying something
poetic concept but there really is
nothing deeper
what-you-see-is-what-you-get the the
surface is the depth and don't read
anything more into it then killing moon
sounded like two interesting words to
use to describe the sword it doesn't
matter but in that in that case it
wasn't being used to inspire the work
was after the fact so one question I was
going to ask other people they they've
been radically edited and rearranged to
make so in fact it would make more sense
to try and translate this into Japanese
then refer back to the tapes
I can translate from Japanese into
English but not the other way round kick
so someone else would miss translate
your work I have someone in mind and I
just have to convince him to do it and
we have to get a publisher on board and
but some nice stuff being translated
into Chinese in Korean I just I can't
even begin to think because you've read
architecture depends and there's a lot
of wordplay and whatever that's simple
that's not gonna work and I sort of
well but what happened what comes up in
towards the end was a huge particularly
the younger generation but also his
generation to work together to bury
their egos and work together on non
spectacular architecture would really
exactly meet the needs of the people
they were building for and I think this
has had a profound effect on the
profession and done some very
conventional buildings recently King
Kakuna is the person who just kept on
doing the same thing because in a way
that was the way he was always thinking
relatively conventional buildings built
cleverly that really asked the people
but that's true but I don't think that
invalidates the idea of the
mentor-protege the master and disciple
because it just depends what the master
or the mentor has to teach if they are
interested in all of those issues that's
what they'll pass on to the next
generation so it's true without half of
what you say is true and half I don't
think is
and nothing's happened and it's for me
that would be the most profound wake-up
call to the profession and to the
industry and the regulatory system and
nothing's happened so it's it's
heartening that Toyota's did that after
the tsunami okay time for one last
question if not we can conclude thank
you very much to us that's really
interesting and the book is great and
it's on sale but you're just gonna have
a free drink and then look at it in the
library their students Tom's
[Applause]
