so with a please welcome Julian to the a
thank you and thank you for welcoming me
here so I've been very nice two days at
a very different school to the ones that
I've visited so far I've really enjoyed
it and I'm just gonna talk a little bit
across the different kinds of projects
that I've been involved with between
practice and academia these were things
that always overlapped in my time I
found that the practice very early on
and when we were working as freelance
engineers on the project that you see at
the top left these are the medina Piazza
shading umbrellas in Saudi Arabia and
when we did the structural analysis for
it we kind of founded the practice to
back up and then did the PhD and kind of
the practice was growing at the same
time and then when I finally finished
the PhD in 213 we said okay now we'll
just give it a shot and see if there is
this this field for us engineers who are
kind of wandering the worlds between
research and practice and looking for
new challenges in what we can find there
and in that sense it's always been a
kind of a search for creativity and a
search for for finding ways of
collaboration with architects with other
researchers other engineering
disciplines I'm just going to reflect a
little bit on that of what we've
encountered as problems and where we
found maybe some first solutions in the
in the last couple of years and when I
talk about civil engineering I think
it's important to highlight that our
discipline is actually very young so the
civil engineer as a profession is barely
a hundred years old and it used to be
that we had architects who were who were
masters at building and who were basing
structures on intuition and on
experience and so we see especially in
these amazing large span structures you
see a lot of heritage of engineering
that was done that with today's
knowledge of engineering doesn't
actually
make a lot of sense because it's based
on empirical methods and on tests and on
seeing that things hold but maybe not
quite fully understanding why they hold
and this 200 year old structure at the
Garda less in Paris is kind of a nice
example for it I think lots of people
sitting in this room probably passed
under it and you've seen this kind of
cable net structure um that's that's
bracing these arches and there's at
least three overlaying cable tension
systems that all by themselves could do
the job and in the way they overlay they
actually don't really make sense but
this thing has been standing and it sits
perfectly standing actually looks really
nice and it kind of makes you think
about why at the point when we founded
our profession and we started relying on
things that we could calculate that
actually took away a huge amount of
creativity in structural design per se
and this had a very big influence from
engineers in the railway industry so the
railway industry really were the people
that had to build lashed and structures
for their bridges and their big railway
stations so people like Gustave Eiffel
they were actually coming from this
industry and they founded a theory that
made it possible to predict the behavior
of their structures and these this
prediction this calculation of
understanding how the forces travel
through a system what kind of reaction
forces they cause and then understanding
how big do I need to size a member the
led to a whole typology of structural
systems that we would build our systems
with so there were arches there were
three hinged arches and there was frame
structures all in a way that we could
describe them and in a 2d very easy
fashion and calculate them and we're
kind of at a point now where today's
computation should enable us to leave
all of this world far behind but we're
still in this kind of transition phase
where we're trying to understand if we
can let go of things that we can
calculate by hand how do we then
understand what an efficient structural
system is it's quite interesting that
actually not long after this time it was
a
yes structural engineer Conrad Sousa who
actually built the first computer I
think a lot of people don't know that
this guy was actually structural
engineer and his motivation was that he
said the kind of mundane part of
structural engineering
he found it really boring to calculate
all of this and he wanted to compute
this and make it automatic so that was
there was actually one of the
initiatives to actually build a computer
to make structural design automatic
today we'll obviously you know we've
left this long behind and we're now in a
position where we can use modern
engineering software like finite element
methods or other methods which allow us
to not only take a structural system and
then break it down into an abstraction
and and slice it into topologies that we
can calculate and then say now I can do
you perform the structure in engineering
on an abstract model no today we're
actually able to take the entire
structural system three dimensional
limit lists in the geometry and perform
analysis on it and not nearly feedback
data into the system in terms of sizing
but also influence the design based on
our calculations but this kind of leads
to to a position of the structural
engineer which actually makes work
almost a little bit more difficult it
was kind of comfortable when we could
break down things into slices and say if
we want to build this we need to build a
frame yeah the spans between the frames
are X and then you just slice your
structure and off you go so now
everything is seemingly possible right
we can just take any model and calculate
it but then what is the basis to design
something meaningful something sensible
something that actually works and I find
it kind of interesting that we're at
this point in structural engineering but
when it comes to the construction
drawings themselves and to the programs
that we use to bring the large
structures into the onto site and on to
fabrication we're actually still relying
quite a lot on the traditional systems
of cutting our geometry into slices and
just breaking it down into something
that we can handle so this project by
Zara is probably
to many of you in Korea the DDP and it's
an amazing it's an amazing piece of
architecture and it's kind of almost
ironic that Tecla the BIM software would
would advertise this and say that Tecla
the software I made is seemingly
impossible possible right so this is the
big slogan on their homepage they say
we're now able with our software to make
something that you supposing we can't
build we can make it build build but if
you if you focus into it you see that
actually there's nothing terribly
innovative about it in the way the
structural system is laid out to do you
know come up with a new new way of
answering the questions that we are
being asked by architects and this is
not a criticism per se to the to to
whoever was on this project because we
just simply don't have the tools and
once you have to design a project of
this size you know you can't sit down
some creative students and just script
something fancy so you you know you can
shoot out a nice thing that we do at
university with our small pavilions you
know this is massive amounts of steels
timelines and everything we just don't
have the tools to give the answer but we
have to rely on these softwares because
breaking this down by hand and drawing
this by hand let alone bring it down to
shop drawings or whatever else just
simply wouldn't be possible so there's
this kind of promise that we say BIM
Building Information Technology this is
going to be the future and this is going
to make us all much more efficient and
we can collaborate there's this kind of
promise in BIM that we use to
communicate individually between
disciplines BIM creates a Central
Information model which stores the
information and then we communicate
across this model like you see on the
right hand side there's this kind of
promise that this is gonna make us all
more efficient and then we can build
much faster much more reliable and then
the big promise is always that you have
them less legal cases within your within
your structural design process and we
are actually kind of there if we build
something fairly standard this is a
hotel that we build in the office and
it's it's amazing to see that today we
can build a multi-story
we
force concrete structure of some
complexity with you know just one and a
half engineers in an office bring it
down to the reinforcement drawings
everything just handled computationally
and in this case actually going as far
as running it off of one single beam
model between the architects and the
engineers and you know reaching some
efficiency in that and being able to
handle such a system with just a few
people and in a very short time span
on a sidenote this doesn't mean that
we're making more money yeah so this is
kind of also always the question if this
is making us speed up if this is making
us seemingly more efficient none of us
in the industry have experienced that
we've become richer because of that that
we're just doing more and we're just
doing it faster but we're not really you
know hugely profiting from that because
at the same time the prices are dropping
and at the same time there's other bits
of work coming in that were not
necessarily being paid for which you
know just shift shift the interest so
this is kind of a status quo we're where
we are we can we can you know combine
three dimensionally the models that we
use in structural engineering with the
architectural models and then based on
this model we can bring data towards the
architectural design towards the
construction side and towards our
engineering models on the construction
side itself when it comes to this kind
of medium-sized structures we don't
really see any impact of that you know
our building technologies it's all still
fairly traditional so as a result of
that there's this amazing statistics
that the German Ministry has recently
published where they showed that whilst
all other industries in Germany have
gained productivity through
digitalization the building industry
which is the blue line has maintained
pretty much the exact same productivity
in terms of our spend per outcome and
money you gain
so this is kind of almost a bit scary
right and that's kind of what I'm
talking about we have these tools and we
have this promise that BIM is leading us
into this world where everything is
becoming much more efficient but
apparently industry is not reflecting
this this got to do with lots of reasons
it's got to do with the fact that we're
only just at the beginning of this
digitalization we're learning to work
with it and we will see new data in the
next years where we probably maybe see a
trend towards more productivity but we
have this inherent problem of building
prototypes facing completely new
challenges with almost every project and
handling a vast amount of individual
disciplines which have to be coordinated
and in this setup is just not the same
setup as building a car where you can
autumn eyes everything and kind of
streamline it to the max profit so the
question is if there is this promise and
we apparently can't handle it if there's
this way that we can now construct
things and analyze things but we're kind
of finding it hard to bring it to the
side what is the missing link what are
what are we missing here and I totally
don't have the complete answer I'm just
seeing kind of moments where we have
found ways of kind of tackling exactly
this problem in some detail approach so
to kind of highlight what I'm going to
talk about I'm going to pick again a
project that I really like it's the it's
a museum from BMW in Munich copayment
Blau designed this and you can kind of
see this trend right we're all very
familiar with this kind of architecture
now and we find it actually very easy to
design something like this now whilst
some 25 years ago it was actually a real
challenge to design something like this
in the CAD software that we had
available today I would kind of say any
undergrads student can pick up rhino and
make a creature like that right because
we just have the plugin and boom you go
so it's just super easy to do and that
also means that we just do it right we
don't spend too much time thinking about
the consequences of designing something
like that
and then you have the structure
engineering software which you see in
the center and we're also at a point
where we can do this really easily yeah
we just pick up the Rhino model now for
every other engineering software you
already have a Rhino plugin so you don't
even have all this transferring data
problem you just pick up the geometry
perform structural analysis on it and I
would say with today's software doing
structural analysis on something like
this requires far less engineering
knowledge than doing hand calculation on
the bridge that Gustave Eiffel built
which I showed in the beginning now
there's also lots of dangers involved
because you might not know what you're
doing and you might not be able to
interpret the results but they're just
the action of doing it and doing an
analysis and achieving a result whether
you'll be able to interpret it or not
has become almost dangerously easy and
then comes the moment where where to
build it often in the mechanics of how
these things are handled it goes into
tender and then maybe some totally
different people have to handle the
project then we have to break it down
into something that we can construct
with the methods that are available
today and the results of that often
something like this where you can really
see that we have these traditional
methods especially in steel structure
how to join things and how to do that
automatically but when we bring in the
complexity of geometry that we are able
today there seems to be a kind of break
there seems to be a moment where I'm not
sure whether this is the best answer to
build this and it is actually proving
lee actually a fairly expensive answer
to and this is what i want to talk about
a little bit in the next project so to
summarize the sort we've developed
computationally aided design towards
computational design which means that
we're not using the computer as a
replacement for the draw but what were
using a generative and we've been able
to use computationally aided engineering
towards really hybrid approaches we can
simulate I would say almost everything
but we really haven't tackled the part
of the construction side the part of the
shop drawings and the part of the detail
design to an extent that we can really
truly handle the complexities that we're
generating in the first two software
packages as a young office this is kind
of something that you can do almost as a
strategy when you start with a young
office you often are able to pick up
projects in the later design phases for
for us when we were still young and
small it wasn't really possible for us
to you know collaborate with with big
architects on big projects but we worked
a lot with the building industry that
won tenders and that took us to optimize
the system towards fabrication so this
was kind of our learning ground for the
first three four years in our practice
that we really collaborated with
industry and we were there to optimize
the designs towards fabrication so this
was a very important learning ground
where you then can also learn to judge
you know what you can but you can still
generate in terms of the performance of
the system so this is kind of what this
project speaks about is 45 meter span
grid shell structure clad with ETF it
cushions and it's this kind of classic
thing very easily designed like that
fairly formal it's not an efficiently
designed shell per se it's it's a it's a
form it's actually an entrance building
to a dinosaur park and they have this
idea of these splitting cells and eggs
so it's a fairly formal and you know and
you can just imagine how easy it was to
model something like this and use some
some Rhino scripts and then you get a
mesh on it and then you have your grid
shell and you can do the structural
design and you're done you know you know
the sizes you know the masses but you've
left the project with a huge impact on
the industry because not a single note
in the system is the same and you get a
lot of angles where the angles are so
steep that is kind of the the tubes that
are building the note are totally
intersecting so it turned out that the
budget was totally blown in the project
they were getting
that totally blew the budget and got
into a second tender phase where people
were asked to come in with alternative
ideas and at this point we entered the
project and we brought in this idea and
this is very much based on the research
that we did at university how we could
design a steel node in the same fashion
that we were using timber at university
to break it down into 2d processes of
milling or in this case laser cutting
and enforcing all information into the
pieces that we're cutting so we don't
need shop drawings and so we don't need
any kind of dyes that you need to
construct a node when you weld it I'm
going to talk a little bit more about
the node but the basic principle is that
you have the degrees of freedom in terms
of the rotation of each arm which is
organized by by these swords which are
attached to the end of each tube we have
the angle at which they're coming into
the node which is organized by the by
the holes and the of these sports
which are connected like this and then
we have the angle parallel to the normal
direction of the node which is just
simply the cutting pattern of the slot
itself so it just becomes this amazing
puzzle that you need to be able to put
together then you can put a lot of
thought into if a piece of steel is on
the laser what additional information
can you put onto the piece of steel so
you're actually handling it without any
shop drawings so there was a positioning
numbering system that would say in the
last two digit in decimal at what
distance they needed to weld the
secondary part on the steel there was a
kind of laser marking on the steel that
organized the direction of parts we kind
of break it down until you're sure you
can handle this entire thing without a
single printed drawing because then you
can just send it from the computer to
the Machine and into the manufacturing
and onto the side and then think it all
the way to the end that on the side it's
also easily erected it's sorted in a way
that they can pick up the parts very
quickly and so on and so forth so kind
of what we're doing in small
this you know or vogue pavilion
structures that we're doing across all
the universities at the moment so it's
kind of always the same story right
we're designing a detail that's kind of
logic in itself we're now calling it the
digital detail because it's not only
digitally manufactured but it's also
organizing its own manufacturing and
assembly interestingly it's actually
structurally also performing very well
so the top note is what was put into the
tender a very classic connection that he
would bolt together to hit the angles
correctly with a tolerance of less than
a millimeter or less than a tenth of a
degree which you need in such a shell
you would have to laser cut pieces of
steel that give you the angles then you
slide in the the vertical pieces of
steel and weld them so ironically using
modern digital technology but not to
build the note but just to help build
the note and in this case we're using
the laser to build a note right and it's
actually pumping up the geometry to some
structural stiffness where this very
node where you're connecting seven arms
and our case only weight eighty-two
kilogram of steel and the original one
was 100 ohms and 20 kilogram of steel if
you go times they're almost 400 nodes in
the system this is actually a
significant amount of weight and even
more in terms of cost the top note had
had a total of 2900 high grit
high-strength steel screws throughout
the project and this note which is only
clamped together by one central bolt
because it's a form-fit connection the
bolt is not used to transfer forces just
to lock things in place it's only 260
bolts so right there you're already
saving close to tens of thousands of
euros just in bolts so it kind of breaks
down it is something that finds
efficiency in saving weight in saving
manufacturing time and saving assembly
time and also in saving parts and the
drawings themselves are not joins
they're just explanations they're just
explaining
with some very basic excel sheets
quality management is super important so
they need to be able to sign something
right if something goes out of the
factory they need to able to sign off
that they've checked the measurements
it's something that we have to learn as
well they need a piece of paper where
they can put a signature and say this
measurement is correct so we printed out
pieces of paper with lengths of the
beams and showed them where to measure
them and then they could sign that off
and yeah so you kind of see it's
basically an a system of explaining
which part goes where and then the part
itself finds its way through the
position numbers for the engineering of
it it was kind of interesting that we
were faced with actually two challenges
for one we had to filter out out of the
massive amount of data and the results
that we needed to actually analyze this
node and then go into a hand calculation
of the notes we could very quickly
script a way to filter out the notes
that are decisive for our system because
this is also kind of a result of
computational engineering that we now in
our software we just automatically
combined all the load cases when you
combine wind with snow and all the
different directions and the different
partial safety factors and you end up in
such a project with 92 load cases yeah
so you go 92 times 400 notes and then
you're trying to filter out what you
have to do you're certainly not going to
calculate 400 notes with 92 low cases
it's just way too long so this kind of
makes us go back to I fool and learn to
hand calculate things so we can really
fastly script them and it makes us go to
some really profound FAA coding so we
can actually simulate what this form-fit
connection does because no one in the
Euro code is their connection with tools
that are grabbing into each other but by
Yuriko were allowed to simulate
interestingly it actually says in the
Euro code that you're only allowed to do
this if you can prove experience which
brings you back to academia if in your
PhD you've done this you can
give them your PhD and say I I know how
to use every day and you know it's not a
joke there was a there was a third party
proof engineer which was seriously
doubting that we could construct such a
node without testing it in a lab and he
was more traditional and he didn't
really believe in this power of FAA so
we had to prove to him what he can do
and we were actually taking part of our
research work to prove to him where we
get you know tested things against
simulation and testing and kind of
showing him there you know we're not
creating beautiful color plots in Rhino
we actually kind of know what we're
doing and this is really difficult in
terms of structural design because you
have a connection which is which is
working through friction and contact
which is something that's terribly
computationally expensive to simulate
now so simulating one of these nodes on
a on a very strong computer now offers
with one single load case would take up
about two and a half hours of
calculating it until we got a result so
you can imagine that would have been
totally impossible to you know check
every node in the system so we needed
the hand calculation to find out which
one we need to calculate also compare
the hand calculation to the FAA so our
third party review kind of knew okay
this is safe and then go deep and
understand the exact stresses in the
system because obviously there are some
not stretches in the corners and you
kind of need to understand what's
happening there and then when this thing
came to site we try to figure out a way
that this was also really fast erect so
what we did is we designed these
connections and
through these tooth sticking out and
these are only there temporarily to lock
the piece of steel in place and you can
see the top left arm is actually only
hanging on one single that's
connected to the central plate there's
only one plate there later there's going
to be two so we designed the system so
it can withstand that for the longest
arm in a horizontal layout so they can
build it as a free cantilever so in the
end on side they only had three guys
that one guys sorting it one guy putting
it on the crane and the third guy adding
it to the notes and they were building
this thing in in a couple of weeks
actually on a side note when you make a
parametric model of such a connection
it's very important that on day one you
think about the odd ones out yeah so 90%
of the nodes are perfect circles but
there are some situations where the
geometry is so tight that we can't fit
it onto a circle so if we had scripted
the nodes based on a circle we would
have spent almost as much time hand
drawing or hand computing the last three
nodes which don't work as we had on
working on the script but because we
kind of picked these points right from
the beginning we build the script around
the kind of most complex part of the
geometry so it can handle everything
this is really really important and
whatever you do in computational design
that once you go into the digital you
make sure you never have to step out and
do something by hand and if you do then
this is also important part all the
scripts that we work with none of them
are complete runs from design to
production they're always elements so in
each element you can export the geometry
into a layered structure that you have
in your CAD software you can if you need
to you can change it by hand and then
feed it back into the automatic digital
world also really important part yeah we
at academia we tend to try and build
this perfect
that everything is connected and we
can't really manually interact with it
this manual interaction in parts of
projects is really important it's just
time efficient okay so you can kind of
see the result in the end you can maybe
get an impression of the complexity of
the geometry now once this thing was
built we kind of understood that this
this way of working with steel works
fairly well and we applied it to the
next project which was a textile facade
at the new editors campus in western
Germany where adidas had this idea that
they wanted to clad the big parking
house in the south of their campus with
a facade that's kind of triangulated and
they wanted a completely kind of non
repetitive pattern on it so the design
challenge we had was to generate a
facade layout where everything was
unique and you wouldn't kind of be able
to recognize that parts are the same and
make it kind of fairly efficient because
this is a you know it's an 8,000 square
meter facade on a parking house which
naturally doesn't have a very good
budget for for an additional facade so
with a PhD from from this inner chain
program which we are part of some of you
may know it it's a it's a it's a ph.d
program across Europe and we are one of
the industry partners and our our PhD
students enup who's working at the angle
auntie in in Vienna she came to our
office and started scripting these
systems we're through some machine
learning and different scripts she was
trying to organize a triangulated facade
system that would just kind of form find
itself into something that is totally
non repetitive and we found that you
know we had parameters that we wanted to
meet angles which didn't go under a
minimum inclination so we could build
our node we wanted a certain amount of
amplitude between the low point nodes
and the high point nodes and most
importantly we needed cellular sizes
which work in terms of the textile now
we wanted to keep it within a certain
sighs and it kind of turned out when it
was fully automatic that we'd always get
about 80% of the facade to work
reasonably well and then there was
always these one or two corners which
totally don't work there so this in this
generative way we were able to you know
handle the large part of the project but
the rest just totally didn't work and
then when we try to manually adjust that
last bit that also didn't work because
once you're really constrained within
your mesh then it just you know we we
couldn't really figure it out and we
understood that maybe actually we need a
new approach which kind of brings it
back to this question of of also
creativity and where do we come in as
designers and and where do we use
automation and we really found that when
we were looking at the facade and we
printed it out you immediately see where
there's repetition and you see like we
needed like a bit more organized on that
part is you know we have a natural
feeling for this and we were asking
ourselves what can't we implement that
well why do we even automate that this
is this is almost the biggest fun we
have in our profession just that moment
why are we autumn izing it so we started
drawing this facade and just building
bounding boxes around the nodes and just
allowed it a certain geometry within
which each node could travel so it could
optimize within a system that we had can
laid out and this this approach actually
worked really well we managed to then
generate facade systems on something
that we initially designed and then we
we got feedback of optimized geometries
from that so we were kind of breaking
down the system into something where we
could interact as designers because we
have a very good feeling for what the
geometry should look like and how we
could maybe resolve a corner where
there's an opening and then autumn eyes
the system to degree where we can then
you know at least your result of a non
repetitive
so these are kind of two examples of the
way we can maybe in some projects
rethink the way we are working with
steel in the way we we designed the
details in the way we handle the
projects when they go to site and also
in the way that we can think about the
whole manufacturing process throughout
the design so one little detail about
this this is a glass fiber fabric which
is hugely expensive so finally it all
comes down to not wasting material when
you cut it up yeah so if they had plaid
the entire triangle with one single
sheet of material we would have in
nesting it we would have wasted a lot of
offcut so that's why we broke it down
into three triangles within one which
actually adds a totally new pattern to
it almost a three dimensionality to it
because you see the fiber direction
reflecting different in the light and
also this was kind of the prime
parameter in our optimization run that
we optimized the geometry towards
nesting of the textile so this was the
the the highest ranked goal in the
optimization was that these triangles
really optimally nested and that kind of
also talks about this this this way that
we've worked with the industry where you
have to work like this when you're in
the later design phases when it's going
on to site and often we find that we
don't we are not forced to think about
this when we start with a very early
conceptual design phases and often then
the most critical decisions are taken
that are stopping us from from doing
something like this in the later stage
so as we're going towards more inclusive
digital processes and we are able to
think about the manufacturing and we're
embracing this complexity and where
we're building these these crazy
geometries it seems to become actually
much more important to think about this
in the first place so we're taking
decisions that make the project's
handled alongside and they make them
make it even possible to deliver
within time and budget but we're not
really forced to do so right beer and in
the way the building regulations are in
Germany we're not even allowed to talk
to the industry in the beginning because
there needs to be a kind of open tender
process yeah and that's kind of where
we're at and where we're we're trying to
find solutions trying to talk to
industry early and I think these are
really the big challenges that we are
we're having to handle in the next
couple of years so it it kind of comes
down to to kind of finding our way
through these new digital tools and
maintaining our grounds as what we love
in our profession has been creative
engineers and architects and not letting
digitalization take over and make us
slaves of the software that were using
which was kind of the example in the
beginning there was only one type of
system that we could construct in our
BIM software and so we're forced to do
so so we're kind of looking for the
grounds of creativity within our
professional and creativity ultimately
and this is always what we promoted
University that's what's very heavily
promoted here at the university too is
that creativity can also come from the
material itself that we're working with
right so you can you cannot only exploit
the manufacturing processes that we now
have available or the software that we
have available the the tools that we
have available but you can also exploit
our profound understanding of material
behavior and make that the design driver
and this is what we like doing at
university and this is where we're
currently wondering how we can transport
that into industry because that's almost
even a step further away then thinking
about manufacturing and the early design
thinking about how you know material can
can influence design to an extent where
it's influencing the manufacturing so
this is I'm kind of bringing it down to
this is what this picture talks about
where much of my PhD was about how we
can use straight or planar building
elements and exploiting the elasticity
to create complex geometry and
two structures is what we call it in
stood guard we're lucky to have some
kostas mentioned it's some very famous
architects and engineers when I started
at University when I think mangas they
actually just left the AAA and came to
came to Stuttgart I had this idea of
working with pending actor structures
and our team was just involved here at
the at the a building this hybrid shelf
which is also kind of exploiting
elasticity of the material and then we
said let's let's do a design class
together and see how students can come
up with totally new ways of constructing
if they exploit elasticity when we
called the class bended and went to fly
otto is sitting at the bottom right and
started talking to him about how they
used elasticity and their designs are
for example the multi holla in Mannheim
and they have a good book about bamboo
structures where they're working a lot
with this and ferrata actually said to
us he always thought that was a really
clever way of building but because he
didn't have the engineering tools and in
the engineering available to really
predict what's happening they never
really dared to solidly rely on these
geometries for large span structures so
actually the multi Hardman hands are
most amazing large timber grid shale but
the form finding on it was based purely
on catenaries now they didn't really
have the software tools to base it on
the natural bending geometries so this
set us off on this project some of you
may have seen it this was the first
pavilion that we built in Stuttgart
between the ICD and idk lots of students
and and almost as many PhDs involved a
lot of us kind of started their
adventures into this computational
design scene driven by material behavior
at the time and here very early in the
design process we thought about the
connection details because we were
working in teams where manufacturing was
a large part of of the design so we
really try to find out how can we make
finger joint connections in very thin
and flat sheets of
timba so we found this kind of puzzle
connection that is glued and finger
jointed because the timber is only six
mil thick so we can elastically bend it
you couldn't make a classic finger joint
it would just simply break open so this
was always a part of these kind of
systems where you think about material
behavior computational tools that work
on a level of abstraction so we were
doing lots of tests actually measuring
real timber arches to understand how we
can abstract their geometry and script
them and then my part in the whole
process was to mirror that
computationally for the structural
engineering site which in this case
meant that we had to RESA malade the
entire erection process so we have a
model that describes all the internal
stresses of the erection and can then be
simulated against wind and snow loads
because it was going to be standing
outside so I think for many of us who
were working at the University at the
time this was really an eye-opener it
was you know for us the first time we
used the robot not very challenging for
the robot to just cut 2d but it we just
had a robot and could have been done
differently and you know was the first
time we were using this methodology
where again on site the members describe
the geometry and not the plans in this
case even more because you're coming
with a flat sheet of material and as you
bend it and lock it into place this
shell form is naturally generated so
this was as I said a really interesting
learning ground to learn about how we
can simulate these things how we can
streamline it to us fabrication and and
also kind of measure their performance
when they're built to a larger scale the
thing that I noticed though also I'm
sure many of you are aware that since
then almost every year one of these
pavilions was built or was a different
material system and also based on the
availability of of what manufacturing
technologies we had at hand and we kind
of noticed that in these groups of
students which were sometimes up to 15
students and four or five PhDs
was only ever one or two or maybe three
students which were actually really
handling the computational model now
there are lots of people involved
organizing testing producing
manufacturing doing some engineering but
the actual handling of the computational
model always boiled down to one or two
students simply because it quickly
became so complex that they couldn't
explain it to each other anymore
and we didn't really have the tools to
handle it with many people there was
just one computer so when I came to hdu
Hamburg I wanted to set up with
engineering and architecture students
away where I deliberately wanted to
build something computationally that's
not built from many modular paths but as
one mega structure and I wanted to find
a way how they can all collaborate
within the digital model just as a kind
of test ground to see whether we can
handle this with many people so we spent
a lot of time sketching on the board
these kind of data trees and ways of
organising the project at the time flux
was still for free and and up and
running so we saw that this flux plug-in
was really good to split up our scripts
and connect them in a cloud so we had
engineering teams we had manufacturing
teams and we had computation teams and
from finding teams and they were all
working on scripts that were based on
the same data structure and whatever
outcome they would have they would
upload onto the cloud and this data
structure could be downloaded again into
their models so this little video talks
a little bit about that it's just
focusing on some structural parts of the
system so we have the Central
Information model where data's tree was
handling the system and there was fairly
abstracts models of the system where
people doing the details could just pick
part of the geometry and adjust it to it
maintain them parametric so that only at
the very end and the last loop we were
updating the geometry in every model and
using it on the final system this was
just one small aspect of it which was
organizing that within this space where
we were hanging the structure
we had to a very set boundary condition
because we only had singular points
where we could attach it and they wanted
to build something where we could
measure the way we can predict complex
behavior and the way the students wanted
to measure it was by building two
totally separate structural systems
which are bending active in the sense
that these high points within the two
separate systems are pushed out by
elastic rods and we wanted to measure
how good we were by seeing whether the
two the two high point circles were
opposite each other in parallel yeah and
we had no way of adjusting the geometry
because this was all fixed points in
space the whole structure was optimized
so the resultant forces were all
perfectly pointing in the direction
where they they were anchored and then
we were there was a surveying team from
the university that just told us where
to pull each cable students could only
pull it from the side so very early when
they were cleaning the windows half a
year before we constructed we just
attached cables to the side and then we
could just hoist it up half a year later
when we build it there was lots of
problems with it the material didn't
work very well because we had to use
fire rated a tube material which is
super normally elastic and it was a
nightmare to produce but the students
sold it themselves we produced it all
ourselves and the equilibrium system
worked within a few centimeters of
tolerances which which we found kind of
a success in this sense so now there was
this kind of floating system that talks
about how where we are at in
computational design in terms of
predictive behavior to such a complexity
where yeah you're not allowed to correct
it you actually can't correct it funny
story on the sidelines to this there was
a conference half a year later there was
a couple of wrinkles in the system and
then some students that are come on we
have to get it really nicely tensioned
and then they started intuitively
pulling on the cables to kind of make it
better and that totally reacted they
never found the real geometry again so
we had one corner was better tension
than the other
and so that was kind of also a nice
feedback is that the best we could get
was by relying totally on the digital
model this this mirrors back into our
daily practice into structures where
we're you know we build things which are
not so apparently computationally
designed where the topology and the
system that we're building is you know a
seemingly classic membrane structure in
this case a convertible roof in a road
in Switzerland which we had to cover a
fifty three meter long road to of me to
span and they wanted to kind of have
this adaptive space where if there were
sunshine or heavy rain they could close
this roof and as attaching to six
different buildings within this road so
a large part of our computational
engineering was about optimizing this
structure to find the support points
within these buildings and find a
structural layout that would deliver
minimal support reactions and to do so
and this was kind of the necessity to
even be allowed to build the structure
we immediately had to work with very
detailed structural models and run them
through multiple different geometries so
we weren't even sure whether it was
gonna be spanning across two stories or
one whether it was gonna sit at the top
of the road or at the bottom there was
there was multiple little iterations
between things but there were almost the
same but they were not and in this case
you know what we have learned in terms
of connecting our structural models in a
computational way to the deform finding
and an architectural model was hugely
helpful to fastly iterate towards a
design that would even function within
this and in the end I always find this
really interesting and I often get asked
by students at our university if we're
doing this if we're building these
pavilions you know is anyone gonna
actually employ me because I don't
really see the big offices building that
and my feedback is always kind of making
making students and making also us as
teachers understand that what we're
actually teaching is to handle these
hugely complex processes and we can
adapt them to everyday problems very
easily and make us work very efficiently
and in an ideal world that I haven't
found yet it would make us gain time for
the creative parts of our profession
so this is the ultimate goal for me that
computation makes us gain time for the
fun part of the work this was why Conrad
Sousa built the computer right which are
seven beginning and sometimes and daily
practice I feel that we're not quite
there
now maybe only I'm doing something wrong
but I'm often finding myself being the
slave of my way to complex engineering
model and just solving problems solving
problems all the time we kind of brought
it to a next level almost of connecting
design fabrication form finding and
engineering into one model when we build
the Danish pavilion for the Venice
Biennale last year together with Sita
Institute in Copenhagen where we wanted
to include knitting as one of the the
main parts of the structural system in
terms of the membrane structure that was
built so knitting today allows us to
build three-dimensional textiles without
any connection seams and we can include
in a knit a three-dimensional
multi-layer textile or all the details
all the sleeves all the connection
points I actually knit it into the
textile that's what your sneakers are
made like today right so if you look at
your Nike or adidas sneaker you will
find that this is actually totally
knitted from one piece of fabric and we
can scale this up there are machines
that can knit as wide as two and a half
meters and we can actually put some very
sizable structures so driven by this
idea and Sita has done many years of
research on this we we launched into
this idea for this for this pavilion
where we wanted to connect this world of
bending active or what we call textile
hybrid structures to knitted fabrics and
again through multiple exercises also
purely model building exercises try to
find geometries that were completely
self-equilibrating
just like what we've done at hdu Hamburg
where all the forces are shortcut within
one system and they're totally in
interaction right the tension of the
textile is bending the beams and and the
elasticity and the spring back of the
beam is reversal II tensioning the tech
stuff like a complete bow and arrow
system today our analysis of doing
something that this is still terribly
slow and and really hard to set up an
interactive process with it and tools
like kangaroo or software's that we are
developing in our office working on
either geometric analysis are not faster
but at the end of the project when we're
handing in our structural engineering
report we can't give them a printout
from kangaroo right so we've had this
phase in the last couple of years where
actually things have become almost
impossible for us to engineer because we
have architecture offices that are
giving us designs and they say this is
physics based modeling super optimized
you basically just need to sign it kind
of thing but we have actually no way of
accessing the geometry it's become so
complex that we as engineers and we have
to calculate them with our tools we're
like the only thing we can do is just
materialize it press the press the load
button and see what it does but we have
no way of rationalizing the system
because it's become so complex that it's
even hard to describe the topology or or
let alone describe any kind of typology
that's that's that's sitting within the
system and on the other I don't want to
say that that's wrong you know this
could lead us into an amazing new new
field of structural design which is
we're just kind of really really looking
for ways of attaching to it and finding
a way to interact with it and this this
Venice pavilion was was really all about
that so if you go back to this image it
was really about connecting these are
all different form finding and
simulation software's which are all all
really good for one aspect of it and we
were really trying to find ways that
they all speak to each other
through Central Information models that
were handling handling the project in
the same way that were describing the
topology so we could translate them
between different softwares so this
would be the kangaroo model which is
super fast and form finding this this
basic equilibrium system between the
elastically bend rot and this tension
textile but we also know from tests and
from comparing it to our FAA modeling
that it's not very precise in what it's
predicting in terms of the final outcome
because it can't even show the system
under dead load you know just it's just
showing the force equilibria between the
prestress of the textile and the spring
back effect of the GRP but actually
these hyper elastic systems they're
actually already under dead load they
take on a different shape to the one
that we're simulating so in this case we
can start using software's like this as
a geometric modeling where we're
performing fe a not on meshes but on not
surfaces and splines which is making the
parametric model very easy because we
don't have to break it down into meshes
and we can you know already once we know
where the geometry is going use this
currently still slightly slower way of
simulating it which can already give us
feedback about wind forces about dead
load forces and all of this finally at
the moment I don't know how long this is
still the case but at the moment at the
end of the day venice biennale super
strict third party review you have to
handle in a euro code report on
something like this so you have to at
least be able to show them that you're
using a conventional engineering
software by which is simulating it and
we've worked a lot with this one FAA
called sophistic and we actually
promoted this bending active world so
much to them that they have implemented
a new beam element which is now allowing
us to input a curved beam and then
sophistic deck calculates the internal
stresses so we don't anymore have to
start with a straight beam and say we're
bending it into a shape but it can back
calculate from the bent shape what the
internal stresses are and then relax it
into the final G homage
so now suddenly industry has come along
with us even just on this tiny detail
and we did some research together with
them and they you know they just thought
it's a nice little challenge on the side
it's has zero impact for their industry
but you know in terms of computational
development it was a nice side line for
them and now suddenly we have this tool
where we can directly connect our FTA
model to the kangaroo model because we
no longer have to repeat the form filing
process we can just pick it up and make
it a little bit better so already we're
like a tiny step towards something that
is a little bit more inclusive yeah and
then in the end you see this the system
which is really there was a large large
body of work by sita about controlling
the knitting patterns that are involved
in this and only talking about the
details that have to do with the form
finding and the engineering of it maybe
one little detail you can see this on
the picture of the on the left it's not
very clear you can kind of see these X's
on the
changing the nits and it's making the
NIT slightly more elastic towards these
high points and that allowed us to pull
out these cones without a cutting
pattern now so you can really
differentiate the elasticity within one
textile alright so currently this has
taken us to the to the next exhibition
which is the World Expo in Dubai where
now we weren't involved from the status
and we're again at this point where we
get asked to rationalize a system at a
later stage and this is actually a super
interesting story about how this project
came about this was a competition that
was won by two students PhD students
from the from the University of Prague
that have formed their own architecture
office Formosa and they had this idea
they want to exhibit a kind of a water
recuperating system that works in the
desert so it's kind of complicated
plumbing and spring system and they
wanted this entrance installation as a
shading canopy you can easily imagine
that if you show this to a kind of a
structural engineer especially in the
Emirates you know they're just going to
say forget it and and so the first
engineering approaches to towards the
system were a kind of steel frame
structure of which you hang the tubes
and when a company approached us and
said don't you guys have an idea how we
can build this a little bit more
efficient and obviously when I see this
I go like bending active let's let's
Bend this whole thing and build it like
that so we had some really cool
workshops in Prague with these
architects and we actually just build
models with them so we could you know
transport our ideas and we could we
could show them and also ourselves
understand what types of geometries are
possible when we're building something
like that where the aim is again to
build something that seemingly chaotic
totally inter woven
we have to find within that an access
towards something that we can
structurally optimize without making
this thing look like it's a fixed
topology so it's a kind of really cool
challenge we're trying to build
something that has some shell
performance without making it look like
a shell and to do something like this
really the best way is just to build
physical models because you can
immediately see what the feedback from
the model does so we've we've built I
think this is the third model that we
build together with them
and then we actually mirrored the model
building computationally again using
kangaroo scripts where we did exactly
the same we found that if we were to
build this is over six kilometres of G
over P that's going to be in this canopy
and if we want to build this within like
a timeslot of a month we can't put every
single rot into the pavilion by one so
we already said we'll cluster them by
pairs of five so you have these strips
of material which we started working
with in the model building and could
also prove that these strips in the
interlocking worked really well
structurally as well and so we set up a
system that we wanted to have these
strips that are folding back in on
themselves and generate geometry through
that we were describing the topology of
what we were building in the model and
could then mirror that back into into a
computational design system which we're
now with these new beam elements and FAA
can seamlessly translate into our into
our system so there was a lot of work
involved a lot of thinking about how to
set up the project so we can describe it
based on a topology just based on a
mapping system so we understand where we
are within our model without breaking it
down into something that's symmetric or
kind of easily readable as a system this
is where we're at now we've just passed
the approval of conceptual design the
next round where the expo is going to be
a little bit right a little bit more
difficult because now we're down to all
these fire rating issues so they're
still a bit of mileage to be done but
it's really in this project that we're
bringing together in
now in a commercial project everything
we've learned at university at these
collaborations with university and now
kind of starting to be able to to
connect all of this into one world and
then the really funny thing I always
find is when you kind of shoot out
standard architectural drawings or
something like this and you know you
don't you make standard elevations and
it looks just
I totally way out then I think this has
kind of been worth it again talking
about scaling up this these ideas to to
building structures where we can
actually make a significant difference
about the masses that we're building
today my my partner the office Alex
Bukowski he's done his PhD in wind
engineering simulating natural wings and
we have set up in our office a big
cluster computer there where we can now
simulate wind in coupled CFD and FAA
models something that we call fluid
structure interaction and the way we're
using it now actually quite a lot also
simulating for cities is the impact of
our designs in terms of the thermal
comfort in terms of the wind and the
fresh air access to cities of what new
buildings have in terms of impact in our
inner cities and also we find that
especially when we're building high-rise
structures or more complex bridge
structures where we have to rely on wind
tunnel analysis to do our structural
analysis because in in in more complex
systems the Euro code or whichever other
code does it doesn't give us the right
wind blows for these shapes and we have
to give our designs to wind tunnel and
we find that by that time we have
already pretty much fixed everything in
our design you know by the time the wind
tunnel is doing their tests we're in in
in the later stages of our design where
we can never go back to completely
changing the shape of our buildings
because we're suddenly finding that it's
not performing very well in in wind
induced vibrations or maybe it has a bad
impact on a neighboring building
so in this front computational wind
engineering is really important and
especially important in this case to
connect it again to the design
environments so there has been CFD codes
out there and people have done so but it
hasn't really been possible to to
include it into a design methodology
where you can really rather quickly work
of feedbacks and have this or based on a
system that is you know proven to
deliver results of some precision these
final stages of modeling what you're
seeing here is where we've connected our
data to wind tunnel data and checked the
correctness of our results and then with
this you can then go quite far into the
analysis of how the wind interacts with
the building because now as our tall
building is becoming more and more
slender wind induced vibrations and the
dynamics of these structures are very
difficult to handle so we're having to
either face these problems at a very
late stage in our design where we can
just simply add two mass dampers to the
top of our high-rise structures which
are very expensive or if we're somehow
managing to include this analysis in
early design we can try and layout our
structures that they are still a slender
but somehow perform better in terms of
their their dynamics so this is kind of
another access that we're finding is
that setting up our connections of our
of our commercial engineering tools
connecting them to all parts of the of
the architectural design is enabling us
to also on that front include these
design ideas and then finally we're kind
of left with this question where you
know usually today architects and
engineers like starting their
presentations were these kind of graphs
in the next couple of years we're going
to hit the nine billion and now in
Europe where we're almost 80 percent of
the people live in the inner cities and
this is a huge pressure and how do we
find answers to that in architecture I'm
showing this at the end because I think
these are questions that we're having to
answer and I'm very aware of the
that none of the projects I showed you
is able to answer any of these questions
right because we are working in fields
where we're working on special
structures that are often the highlights
in an architectural context and are not
building the the mass housing that we
need maybe in some parts this wind
engineering can answer how we can build
tall structures and how we can build
them more efficiently but we with our
work are not really able to answer these
questions and as I'm very aware of it I
want to show you a project which we're
working on at the moment which is kind
of looking towards directions where we
can you know bring in our creativity in
structural design into into some
questions that we are being faced with
especially in Central Europe quite a lot
this is a freeway that's bypassing
Stuttgart and at the time when it was
built it simply cut one of the
satellites it is just good that just
simply cut it into two and if you see at
the bottom right you see this large
green this is actually a a school so
they are right next to the freeway and
the city is just cut into into two
cities and there's hundreds of places
across Germany and Europe where cities
and communities you know really putting
a lot of pressure on politicians and
saying we need to put a cover on the
freeway because the sound emissions the
this year - emissions and the way this
is cutting our our communities within
cities apart are just unbearable and
politics recognize this and say ok we'll
put it into our master plans and you
know master plan in 30 years where
anyway planning to make a four-lane
freeway out of this so in about thirty
six years we'll come back to you and
we'll look at this problem and you
actually really find a lot of cities
that are having to deal with this and in
this case it's even more complicated
because the freeway is state-owned and
the city and the bridges at the city
owns the bridges so it's
politically also really complicated to
find an answer to this so there was a in
Germany we have a council of lightweight
engineering that was made aware of these
problems and they asked us whether we
couldn't develop some solutions for that
and the way we approach this is we first
looked at the traditional ways of
building covers across freeways which is
always a type of tunnel construction now
you build a kind of fully enclosed lid
very expensive structure and especially
a huge pressure on the freeway because
you're having to close most of the lanes
while you're building it and the whole
financing of it takes really long
because you know no one really wants to
pay for it so we had this idea that we
could build something that is actually
bridges that are spanning across the
freeway and we would build the bridges
so they are load-bearing enough that we
can build houses on them so we can
resell the space that we are building
over the freeways and in between the
bridges we'll build something super
light that makes the cover so what
you're seeing here is in the center you
see in these steel bridges that are
shooting across the freeway we can
actually build them all so 30 years
before they make the freeway with an
additional lane because this is anyway
what's being done if you could you see
most freeways in Germany they always
have a lot of space on the side because
they know at some point we might build
another lane so there's any way this
tradition that the bridges are spending
further than they may need and then in
between we've developed together with
some specialists in in botany we've
developed a system where we have a cable
net spending in between the bridges with
a geotextile on it and then extensive
greenery growing very lightweight on
these surfaces so these are merely
covering the the freeways we could
eventually also build them that you
could step on them but not add
significant load but what we're doing
we're building the cover as bridges and
we're kind of spanning in between so
this is kind of what we understand also
has a hybrid approach to a system we're
not building a bridge or a tunnel we're
building a hybrid between
and of turns our membrane structures
bridges and parts of tunnels and kind of
mixing all these worlds together to find
eventually new solutions which can which
can answer these problems and include
that already in the layout of the
existing bridges that we have there
present so this is a project that's
currently running it's it's very present
obviously in the media because it's a
it's a there's a lot of people who want
this and a lot of people who say it
doesn't work and we're kind of in this
debate right now where well we'll take
it next so I want to conclude with this
quote by by Bill Baker which I find very
fitting to to our time where he says in
the past we were limited by the
computation of power and today the
problem is how we harness it and use it
wisely and these are questions that you
know I can't answer but I can say at
least that we're aware there's these
questions out there thank you very much
I'll maybe start off with the first
question and then I kind of leave it all
to you I think it's very interesting the
fact that you start off with each
project with showing a detail of kind of
how things come together then from that
going to larger forms and the whole
building one time and you're talking
about a lot of other efficiency kind of
streamlining streamlining the process
and you know to try and kind of embed
intelligence in the actual kind of
detail and the component itself but for
me like quite a lot of maybe the
inefficiencies potentially come from
this kind of very old kind of condition
of having to design in three dimensions
and then having to from the three
dimensions cut pieces down and then
reassemble them on-site so you go from
3d kind of informations 2d that is then
numerically maybe kind of like index and
then from that into kind of building
construction but then in for example and
this is kind of the case with
architecture that it always kind of
potentially lags behind other indices as
well in other kind of disciplines you
have this thing that somehow kind of
this idea of components merging together
and actually becoming one piece and even
the materiality of it being kind of
targeted to be you know consisting of by
or you know even the three or four
materials so how do you see this kind of
potentially evolving like would you
because already there's you so you went
from 2920 connections to 260 bolts and
then the reducing kind of weight even
more would you think um of the next like
let's say you know look steps in that
would be actually diffuse these kind of
components and looking to more
integrated kind of ways of constructing
more so kind of going from designing the
construction directly without having to
cut things down well I think this kind
of summarizes exactly the questions that
we're asking ourselves there's in terms
of using components there's a project
that I didn't show just because it
didn't fit in timewise but it's just as
important where
you know with this these kind of
connection systems you can't solve every
problem right there's some geometries
where you can solve it very well and
we've had other structures where it just
simply didn't work and we've learned
that today
casting steel is actually something that
we can really efficiently do again
because we can 3d print in sand the
molds so we had a project three years
ago where apparently in Europe were the
first company doing it that we were
printing the molds and sand the at least
that's what the manufacturer had told us
but I think in the car industry it was
already kind of present and it's now
coming into into industry where we can
use it on a larger scale as well that
was totally amazing to see the result of
it I mean obviously the form of a cast
node is you can build almost anything
and it's super beautiful because you
have these these seamlessly connecting
lines in your system and it was actually
very cheap so no one wanted to believe
us when we said let's cast the note
everyone said no way way too expensive
but because we can include digital
manufacturing in that in building the
unique the unique dyes to pour the the
the metal into this makes it efficient
enough to actually make it in the end of
the day it was cheaper than welding a
complex node like this but what's behind
it is actually just in the same way that
we had to deal with it in these
laser-cut parts we had to deal with it
in these Castile nodes there's always a
large part of Education almost that
needs to be done and convincing because
the first reaction is always you look at
it you don't know it way to expensive
way to complicate it we can't do it and
we've really learnt to explain that our
solutions are complex and not
complicated right and this is actually a
huge difference because complexity can
really be handled computationally and
it's actually very complicated to weld
something and mesh the geometries
exactly so
this is kind of the debate and for us
we've really found that all these
questions kind of boiled down to
complexity versus complication and
making a difference there and at the end
of the day I mean we've had to run in
many walls and had many throw backs and
at university of always teach the
students it's super cheap to laser cut
something individual it really doesn't
matter that every part is different
forget it in industry the laser cutting
industry is outsourced from all the
steel manufacturers they are in a
terrible cash battle to get machine
hours to sell them so the machine hours
that they're selling between all the
different laser companies are almost the
same and they're keep lowering in price
so the only bit where they make money is
in preparing the models so when you sent
when you when you get a price from them
and say ok we need X amount of
kilometres of laser cutting or 50 mil
steel then they say yeah it costs so
much when you send them the model say
like these are all different parts like
yeah but we need to open every file and
check it and prove it and this and that
and suddenly the price triples and then
there's no way that you can actually
overcome this because this is how they
make their money so it took us months to
organize that it can make that efficient
but I think that's interesting because
actually it is not that they can't do it
it is how they make their money in fact
because I'm also thinking when you're
saying like maybe it's actually really
good indeed to make them super expensive
and all different if there is like some
catch on the other side so all the other
elements are the same and super cheap
and handled though by people right
because I think when also I think great
lecture but also think about like the
power of competition is one thing but
also I think the power with that to
allow us to think differently I think
that to me is actually the best kind of
opportunity so indeed like how can you
kind of make a balance
I'd say between this because yeah I'm
not sure if this is how I'm going to
phrase the question so let's see but so
let's see we have computation on the one
side and on another side and your
presentation also said that you know you
kind of lost the feeling because
actually you can compute everything so
you're a true believer of whatever you
compute but we can compute a lot of
things and even if he cannot kind of
let's say go back to our hand calc
how do you find a balance within that
and one thing is the balance but also I
wonder where in your practice lies the
opportunity is it in the ability to
verify something different or to compute
differentiation or what where where does
the opportunity lie and how do you feel
about the really big difference between
health and calc and with feeling and
understanding in your heart and in your
hands versus believing of whatever it is
you know mega computer tells us so
there's obviously no one answer so
actually the opera's quite openly and I
said again I don't know where this is
leading us I I don't know where we're
very honestly don't know whether this is
making our profession more fun I there's
moments where I don't know it right
there's moments where we're so tangled
up yeah whereas there's a lot of moments
where we're so tangled up in resolving
the complexity and understanding it
where we're spending massive amounts of
hours on kind of dealing with what we've
done and where I'm really often saying
like we are so stupid as a profession to
always you know now we have the tools
that we can automate to autumn eyes the
things that we could do but we're using
it to like push it a bit further and no
one is paying us for it that's kind of
the dark side or the very very can
almost comic side of describing it
obviously there is a lot of opportunity
in it and there's amazing moments where
you find that through these tools and
through connecting them you're finding a
new way
collaboration you're finding that the
the tools actually made you collaborate
make you communicate and we're finding
that we're really sharpening our skills
in communication and we're finding it
that it's actually leading us more into
model building and into hand sketching
and into hand calculating to discuss our
project kind of on a different dance
floor then we process the project and
this is kind of what I hope we gain more
time for but which is the added value
that you can give to the project with
all these innovative process and this
research so not only what the clients
the project itself well I mean the place
where we come from in Stuttgart is this
idea that lightweight structures mean
that you're optimizing towards an
inclusive system lightweight structure
the very basic principle of lightweight
structure is that you you don't use
lightweight materials and then you say
it's lightweight but he used something
which serves multiple functions and
thereby by including functions and by
including geometry by making form and
structure one so this is kind of our our
highest goal always making the system
more efficient so ultimately we do see
and we get this feedback a lot that
we're saving an awful lot of material
and this is I think a very important
goal and by including material behavior
in this context we're not saving
material because we
cutting it away or because we're milling
a complex section out of a solid section
or something which the car industry does
a lot so you know you use topology
optimization and then you build this new
axial that's in our sense in the
building industry it's not really saving
materials taking material away making it
lighter but we've used the material so
using material behavior using initially
flat parts which are very cheap to
produce and cheap to ship and then
building complex geometries out of that
actually makes a very measurable
difference in terms of how much this is
really I am realizing that I I put the
title to the lecture but I didn't
explain it because this is this is why I
called it new hybrids so you mentioned
that we have this legacy and stood car
of these engineers likes life in Auto
they were performing a lot in the 90s
and early 2000s we're a very technology
driven design was all woke so there was
a large acceptance for for large spend
structures where he can really read the
structural system so it was actually
almost a much easier time for structural
engineer because we could go with these
super clear type ologies of structures
and you could
make a fully forced driven design today
because we have much higher pressures
from from the building physics we have
much more complexities coming into the
system and we have much less acceptance
for these kind of pure structural forms
we can't work like that my my older
colleagues were still working in a time
where the engineer could say we build
exactly the shape because that's optimal
I've hardly ever worked on a project
where we had this opportunity and so the
answer to that is to to find hybrid ways
of modeling the system hybrid in the
sense that we're including multiple
materials multiple design environments
into something where we find kind of
almost like compromises but compromises
in a very positive sense because the
compromise is inclusive and it's not
additive right and we're trying to to
not go down the road of just saying okay
we're lost which is gonna put in our
structural system and then you add
whatever you need compromise in that
sense I still find a higher goal because
it's inclusive in that sense
do you see also like this complex that
you were referring to on material level
as well because I mean from my kind of
all new recession
I mean coming from engineering but when
I try to ask people about this about
actually trying to use kind of materials
that are not uniform not isotropic that
the go beyond just alloys or single
material always the answer was that you
know like it's a very complex thing to
even calculate on very standard kind of
forms as well so do you kind of try to
work or have you seen kind of working
with much more kind of diverse forms of
materiality within a single piece or as
opposed to kind of multiple materials or
as different components are isotropic I
there's kind of boundaries within which
we can exploit that in industry because
we're only allowed to to work with
material behavior that's written in the
codes or we have to test it in membrane
structures there's no codes and so we
always have to test it so there the
membrane materials the the woven ones
they're actually very an isotropic
because there you have the warp
direction of the fiber which is much
stiffer than the weft direction you have
different coating systems and you even
have varying behavior across one one
production of material between the
beginning and the ends of this love
naturally in this industry there's a lot
of testing involved we always have to
run these tests and so we can exploit
much more of that special behavior as
well because that's just part of the
industry not at all to an extent how
we're discussing it in academia though
because simply we're you know these
these far ends of exploiting material
behavior are usually outside of the
behaviors that we're using by code but I
think an opportunity there it's like the
opposite of what you said before right
okay one factory doesn't want to cut all
of them you know let's say all sections
in a bespoke way he can do it but he
doesn't want to but you need to find
actually fabricators that are actually
interested in that product for
themselves because then they want to do
everything to change all the machines
they have in order to collaborate and to
challenge the code right because you
need testing cost a lot of money and we
all know that in our industry and that
kind of is really yea clear kind of
limit but also for example that's where
I think actually working with kind of
pavilions or something like that where
you can actually put something in a real
world
although even if it's once and for two
weeks it doesn't really matter because
actually that you know again enriches
the industry to think and to see ok it's
not so difficult we could actually do it
there might be a market right so yeah
and I think it's
that now we have so much more power to
not only compute an isotropic kind of
material but also try to understand its
behavior and you know maybe I'm not so
much into the whole kind of
computational stuff because I always
think like it's good that we understand
something from the heart and but
actually if we for example using
kangaroo you can really life kind of see
and if you push and pull okay you can
kind of see this kind of behavior which
almost is like you know kind of doing
this and you think that is maybe the
difference in defining technologies
versus understanding a behavior right
because if I can clearly understand the
behavior I know yeah
what is happening in all the points so
maybe we just have to kind of find
fabricators that are keen to to be in
our site let's say - yeah and we find
they are out there they're just
sometimes difficult to find
well I think we have to and I think I I
actually don't agree that we can't
optimize without compromising comfort we
because there's a lot of structural
optimization that's not visible
you know the low-hanging fruits are
picked that's you know there's not going
to be a massive gain in that and we're
not gonna suddenly live on curved floors
because you know a catenary shell is so
optimal and some kind of topology
optimization tool in grasshopper has
told us you know cut the hell out of our
building it's is our beds are gonna be
square for still some time and we like
walking on straight floors so that's why
I'm saying the kind of low-hanging
fruits are picked there's an end to
optimization on that front but there's a
lot of stuff that we can optimize with
the way we build it with the way it's
also a structural engineering challenge
to to optimize towards prefabrication to
optimize towards how much steel we use
within one section there's a lot of
hidden things where the ceiling will
still look exactly the same it might
still be a 25 centimeter floor slab but
what's happening on the inside
what's inclusive in terms of any MEP
together with the reinforcement system
all of that they're still
some of material to be saved and we're
actually finding that right now and I
think this debate is only there for
about five years ten years hopefully now
we're young engineers worked with 3d
models and we build we build models they
calculate the whole structure at once a
lot of our proof engineers work on 2d
models where they cut the buildings into
sections and they find different force
flows through the building that we find
so what happens is we make a
reinforcement layout the proof engineer
finds a different force flow makes his
reinforcement layout and these two just
get overlaid and we build the two yeah
this is this kind of what industry does
because the the proof engineer there's
this tradition that a proof engineer
just adds reinforcement bars where he
thinks we should add them but we're not
building his model or our model we're
building both yeah and this is actually
happening across industry across across
Europe this not like nothing it's not
that we double the size of him to be
safe but this this is often by the time
reinforcement drawings are made there's
a huge time pressure if the proof
engineer says we need to add something
it's close to a catastrophe but it
happens all the time so this stuff just
gets added so on that on that front
[Music]
but actually even XS but that
incorporate things that for me at least
are important such as statics or
production of effects which go beyond
just proving optimal modernist forces or
paradigms so where would you say that
your practice would go once that you
have proved that proven that you can do
the lightest the thinners the cheapest
even though what now we learned it
wasn't like as the cheapest the thinnest
it's kind of the same same question as
earlier on what what where one said that
we're kind of looking for this hybrid
approach
so I'm if you compare our work to the
work that was done in the tradition of
Stuttgart 20 years ago but we are
already not at all dictating design by
saying this is optimal and this is the
only thing we can do so we're actually
really interested in this
in this conversation of including
structural intelligence into something
that's not hughley's purely structurally
driven but I do believe that we have a
responsibility to be careful with our
our use of materials especially in
concrete structures I mean we we have
recently learned that we have no
resources worldwide to rebuild the
cities of Syria was concrete right that
we should include these ideas but I'm
very aware of the fact that it's
probably not very optimal in any sense
in a social sense or in a building
physics sense to just take out as much
material as possible no for instance
maybe closer to architecture and not to
engineering which I do not actually like
to throw this division but yeah I was
about to say in traditional census
divisions or disciplinary divisions for
instance how would you incorporate
issues of ornamentation or effects or
even aesthetics which usually and
traditionally have actually depended on
non optimisation devices maybe they
allow for certain excesses at the expand
of producing beauty which cannot
numerically be defined
[Music]
yes sorry I think your question is
actually a lot less provocative than it
sounds because I think it's it's exactly
what we need to do and it's exactly the
responsibility we have is to understand
that we can't that I think no one of us
can force their discipline and make it
rank higher than any other because we
have these multiple influences on our
systems and I I showed you a project
right at the beginning at the top left
saying this is the first project that we
worked on in in Saudi Arabia these
umbrellas and then we actually had
exactly this this question because these
umbrellas the membranes are ornamental
and this was done by a by expert in
Arabian calligraphy right so we were but
they're just one detail there we had a
really beautiful debate about connecting
the ornaments to what we anyway needed
structurally and we found super
beautiful ornaments that were reinforced
in the textile in places where we needed
to reinforce it so there's ways of also
having these debates and this is for me
this was always the best part of being a
structural engineer if I could have such
a conversation this is what I've totally
thrived off throughout my profession
especially if I talk to someone who'd
never talk to an expert in calligraphy
how cool is that and that's exactly what
I would answer to any of these questions
like bring it on let's let's talk and
let's see how we can you know find new
solutions I can show you
well I have a lot of thoughts and for
example one of the things that I believe
is that Aldo computers are getting
faster and let's say somewhat cheaper
then than before and everybody can have
a computer now I think as architects we
yet actually don't have so much
computational power because for example
I mean just grasshopper can get fairly
slow very quickly because it only runs
for example I mean just an one core of
your computer and then of course if if
you're trying to program something by
text and you're actually trying to run
the routine and all the course of your
computer can also be quite quite
challenging so I think the computational
power that is available today is of
course humongous and it's growing every
day but we cannot as art I mean as
architects probably just a few very few
percentage can actually take advantage
of that computational power so I think
we're still kind of slaves of the
advancements of the tech industry and I
don't know if that is bad or good but
probably using the word slave is maybe a
little scary you know so I think towards
like the question that was asked before
in terms of how can you embed ascetics
right how can you think about ice ethics
well I think like of course being able
to to program and the same bed sometimes
some some sort of like local rules on
right and structural behavior or
material behavior I think it alone
already creates its own types of I said
it right for example I mean we already
see many examples like in
nature I can bottom-up systems like
classical like a flock of birds or ads
right those they work on very simple
rules and then they create it's a global
order or the 1000 and it creates its own
aesthetics and the other thing I really
like to think about but I think it's
kind of complicated is that we have
already I think as a profession made a
vast improvement in terms of let's say
computational design I would say after
the 90s early 2000s of course like the
special modeling group of fosters has
proved that or it works in Saha code or
for example what you showed us today
right that we can easily rationalize
structures or let's say pre rationalize
so it's not like from the early 90s we
model some something in maya and then
this we have to build it right so it's
post rationalized so I think now of
course we have the ability to be smarter
with these tools and we rationalize
designs understanding how forces travel
through structures etc of course
advancements in computer graphic
understanding meshes and all of this has
been a great sake contribution to or has
been something we can take as architects
but I am always asking myself like ok
what's for example the next step right
and of course with robotic fabrication I
mean also I think it's well proven and I
think now when people say oh such thing
is gonna be built by robots well I don't
think a lot of us are still very amused
as before so I mean what's next and
again like as architects we're not in
control of this right like everybody's
talking for example now about machine
learning but machine learning has been
discussed like more than 50 years ago
right and we cannot really innovate
still and and the technical part of
machine learning I mean it's not it's
impossible for us I'll interrupt you and
what
yeah I think I think I like being very
critical with myself and with the things
we do and I think I've very openly said
that we haven't really even resolved
them now to really profoundly under
understand what's next and what all of
the next opportunities and you mentioned
one thing that only a part of the
architects can actually exploit the
computational power because they have
the education to program by themselves
and use the computers in that sense and
that was I think you said it that we
should build these pavilions to kind of
push the industry and and and push our
ideas and I think this is exactly what
we can do what you can do in academia
and what you can do in practice is build
the things and build our visions so that
the computational industry Autodesk
Tecla the big the big industries in that
that are producing the software that
we're doing that they even understand
how we want to build because what
they're doing right now is they're doing
an autumn ization of traditional
building styles right and if we are not
the ones that can program ourselves like
we did in some of our structures the
systems that we want to build then we
are left with only being able to build
what the software can do and this is
actually a terrible status quo to be it
right that we are we have all this
opportunity and the software doesn't
autumn eyes that it automates the kind
of more traditional way what there's
nothing wrong with traditional building
technologies and there's a vast amount
of buildings that are very efficiently
built like that if we want to push it a
little bit towards you know new freedoms
and new new grounds of connecting all of
these boundary conditions then the best
way we can do that is give the industry
the images the examples of of what we
can do and show our visions in that case
it's really not enough to talk about it
and criticize it we have to build it and
show it so that there are structures
that they now work with 3d model
what you thought the role of
computational fluid dynamics is in
making responsive structures and has
there been much kind of backlash or kind
of resistance from industry to implement
weather resistant or weather adaptive
structures hmm so you're mentioning this
active in project which I haven't
actually shown today the research on
these kinetic facades that was part of
my PhD and we've actually only ever
built two structures out there that that
actually showed this this was the the
one ocean pavilion was so my architects
in useful and which implemented these
shading lamellas based on an active
bending and then we built something at
the International building exhibition in
Hamburg the the E bar in was a two
thousand to twelve this wasn't always
something that was really pushed by my
professor University he always really
wanted to push us towards industry for
exactly this reason we have to bring the
things out there and we have to prove
that we're not just you know coming up
with things that have no relevance but
we have found that it's a very very hard
battle to fight to find the industry
partners that take the liability to
produce it just simply because we as
planners we can be responsible for the
stuff that we plan and the industry
partners they have to take at least some
responsibility for the things that they
built and if you duplicate that by the
thousands of square meters on a facade
system it's very hard to find the
partner because there's hundreds of
projects out there of kinetic facades
that worked for two years and everyone
knows this so particularly towards that
it's a very hard battle we have
obviously I mean the the stuff that we
did had some media echo and and we still
get asked at the office you know every
every other month and there's a project
popping up couldn't we do this and we're
not bringing it to the side because at
some point people just aren't you scared
can you see something to get me
because I'm really also thinking about
because we don't do anymore one of
actually we are thinking also as
engineers much more as like kind of
product designers so if we talk about
liability and if we actually replicate
it on every tower possible then maybe
all the investment we are going to do in
that one product to do something has a
potential you know to actually come to
the real world and I think as well like
this is super difficult to you know kind
of imagine and to find out who would
collaborators in this sense are but
actually so I think that if you move
away from the one off there's another
you know possibility that we can thrive
for to actually implement which comes
down to modules nowadays are not the
same but their system that you can
repeat in different geometries which is
kind of what we're doing there cool
thanks I visit these improvements that
you have shown
I just feel fascinated about how they
open and how did they close and I really
thank you very much for that because it
was really really nice to do that in my
country my question is you use different
materials and but you get limited with
something so you need to use other
materials and such whenever you use a
new material or try to use other
materials that you haven't used do you
have to a lot of mount of information
about this material to build with it or
to use it for what you're using and is
it better to use different materials or
rather focus on raw material and be
specialized in this video
so there's there's again these kind of
limits that we have in the industry like
new materials as we may be discussing
them yet don't really exist in the
portfolio that we can work with in
structural materials and we are we can
use steel aluminium timber and and
concrete and then there's membrane
structures which already need testing
and fiber reinforced plastics which are
also not in a code there's a year ago
coming up in about two years
but right now we also don't have a code
but beyond that we can build with clay
and there's kind of examples for that
but I didn't mention glass so yeah
exactly
but there's not a kind of totally crazy
new material that we can suddenly build
with without really extensive testing in
terms of working within this portfolio
of materials you'll find that especially
the smaller offices the teams within the
larger office they usually focus towards
one material because there's attached to
to just the knowledge about how to how
to calculate with this material there's
a vast amount of knowledge in the
construction principles that are
attached to one material so if you're an
expert in steel and you know all about
the students then you may not know so
much about timber connections or so in
our office we try to use every material
and try to have one person connected as
an expert to every material which is
very difficult to do because there's
just so much extra knowledge in terms of
construction not so much in terms of the
calculation that's relatively easy but
there's ways of using reinforcement bar
there's ways of detailing steel which
are not written in the code which is
just experience and may be published
here and
okay thank you very much
