hello hello everyone and thank you all
for joining us tonight for the second
for the second installment of the series
critical practice we'd like to thank the
school especially ever and many J for
having confidence in our initiative for
it so my name is Luke DeMarco and
together with Tobias hands a douse guard
and Aria Arab Shahi we've organized this
series and search for a more proactive
mode of practice so critical practice
series is a call to reimagine the
relationships between the profession and
the networks of actors and conditions
that surround it so together with
architects designers planners and
economists who are piloting new models
for engaging with the public realm we
will have an open conversation about
common challenges and exemplary
initiatives in discovering ways to have
a more nuanced impact on the built
environment we unfold three themes that
we believe have the potential to
redefine the future role of the
architect forms of Alliance which will
happen tonight rethinking clients which
happened two weeks ago and a third
conversation around the topic of
affording risk which will take place in
February M so tonight's topic how do we
form alliances both with alien and
familiar actors or in other words how do
we collaborate and with home and how in
order to strengthen our role as
architects and designers and easie past
was a common vision for a greater public
good so this discussion will rethink the
conventional forms of collaboration and
explore forms of non-monetary value
common values and trust I'll now hand
the session over to Tobias who will
introduce tonight's guests and share
this conversation thank you
Thanks so hi and welcome we've much for
tonight and to welcome this fantastic
panel of speakers and we have asked each
participant to present their position
and their work can you hear me okay and
following the presentations that each
give will open up the discussion to the
floor for everybody to join him and yeah
take part in the conversation so so in
this here we have Williams
it was co-founder and CEO of public
practice so he previously worked at a
general public agency Croydon Council
and the GLA Finn sets and the Rainsford
review task force pas for our IBA
planning group and they're working in
the Public Interest advisory group he's
a visiting professor at the Institute of
innovation and public purpose a tutor at
the ICA and was a co curator of the
British Pavilion at the 2016 then in
sexual Banali and next to him we have
who is a co-founder public practice and
works in the TLA regeneration team
overseeing strategy policy and practice
in Northwest London she previously
worked at p√∫blica and we made that
brooch as a trustee of the Museum of
architecture member of das a review
panel a mentor at the Stephen Lawrence
trust a fellow at the Institute of
innovation and public purpose and an
advocate for diversity in the built
environment sector she was nominated for
the planets Women of Influence 2018 a
next puja
we have fake person who graduated in
1997 from the same Luca School of
Architecture and Brussels and very soon
after graduating he co-founded 51 info e
a brussels-based international practice
that contributes
the sign to social and urban
transformation parallel to his
activities at 51 employee he has been
performing in international academia
Rory McGrath founded the london-based
design studio okay I am in 2008 together
with oliver night okay I am is engaged
in ongoing partnerships with artists
curators editors architects designers
institutions the clients and
commissioners include Alex JW Anderson
the Guggenheim the met and hit nerve
Institute alongside collaborations with
artists including firsts
you can teller and she's at the wood as
creative directors and partners of real
review okay I am explore what it means
to live today and as founders of their
publishing house in other words they
create books and other printed matter in
close collaboration with artists and
other cultural protagonists and last we
would like to present to you who is
London Paris based architects with a
postgraduate dual degree in urban
policies from this channels Po and
Elysee alongside has practiced others
for cities that aims to drive urban
changes by breaking architecture
politics and economics Flavia is a
writer and has been invited to intervene
at Harvard Kennedy School Columbia
jiseop it's a heart surgery and
architectural Association
he recently wrists the book new comments
for Europe and we had announced that was
part of the original team he is now he
had a last-minute cancellation we are
super excited that's Rory and Franco in
this talk so please give hand and then
we
[Applause]
would you like to start
and overthrew thanks Finn
thank you
thank you very much and then there hi
hello
thanks thanks for all your presentations
thanks for the invitation to be at the
table
I've taken the subject quite as a good
students let's say so because I think
part of my job at some points so I'm
architects I've been trained as
architect graduated as an architect in
France you can afford to be graduated in
architects because school are free and
then I went to Paris political science
school and then I finished so I have
this kind of interesting background
between like being like that does not
understand this but just like when you
spend like some knowledge about this I'm
still learning
I know taking course of finance and real
estate because I think it's quite
interesting well - so the the - part of
this talk divided between like what we
call the sometimes and what we call the
bad I can't really define what is good
what is bad what is good what is bad but
I've just tried to play with these two
definition first audiences for the good
I will talk about the project that we
started here with three years ago it was
a teaching unit called rock your Oracles
for Europe
he was very interesting because at that
time the European subject was not some
on the table but he suddenly arrived on
the table the day of the opening
ceremony at the a a because that was the
day of the brexit that was the day of
the breaks it's like when when UK what
breaks it that was the opening
exhibition yeah so we kind of celebrate
that day at some point what was really
interesting in this unit we had like
great students some of them are here
really close like say it was like it was
not only unit that was also a discussion
program so we invited many different
people from London but also from
elsewhere here you see Chris the Aachen
that was a really interesting day like
Chris Ducker not only for us in a small
room nobody else from the school came
like really surprisingly it was
announced but like and doing doing one
of these conversation we also had an
Tony and Jimmy cook which is no teacher
here and we interesting decision about
like engage practice and how to engage
the architectural discipline two or more
responsibilities throughout the society
and to all the territories and
interestingly enough we were speaking
with an-24 massamba and I was telling
him like you know there are like kind of
emerging practices all over it could be
interesting to meet all together and
also to meet people who have like the
same kind of idea we organize the tapes
so good interesting days of discussion
where engage practices from all over
Europe came for one day of discussion
everyone present in one project only for
15 minutes and then having a discussion
of like 45 minutes that was really
interesting because suddenly it was not
about like the project he was
about like the condition of practices
the attitude that these practices are
shaping over the condition economy it
means do you sustain engagement all the
time about this but that was a very
interesting day also really critical day
because I think for making audiences you
don't have to be always like agree with
someone I think conflict is also part of
like conservative audiences everything
has been yeah it's you I mean it's
interesting settings we work with
because it helps you to communicate your
idea sometimes you're in the midst of
your project and it's very hard to get
things out and what is interesting is
like it's also made for lazy reader
because and the left-hand page all we
have a black page and with few sentences
and few moments that kind of the mix of
economics reaction politics sensation on
the table from kind of different
background yeah and the idea was to kind
of bring these people bring these
agencies we first make and start to some
other people at different place and in
different situation the second one was
in Belgium at the World Trade Center
with the invitation of
a decorator of the by now the third one
was in Amsterdam with the act for
democracy workshop organized by the
rancor achievements and Stefan
determined with his mission and so it's
really interesting to see this taking
place and taking shape in different
cities the second part of the talk is
audiences with the devil which is also
part of my daily job so what you see in
the background here and what you what we
call this cash flow so this is important
[Music]
because it's the international language
of business when you speak to someone in
the business when when you look at you
when you look at your project
it doesn't look at your image or your
plan or is thinking about like is cash
flow is thinking about like the present
value the future value the yield or the
rent passing and how the money will
evolve over time so that could be really
out it's kind of really outgrown things
but it's also important language to to
get into it because if you integrate if
you understand language then you can
also bring forward your ideas at some
points so that was the first project I'm
not showing any architectural renderings
because I'm not architects and I don't
really I'm not responsible for the
imagery but what I'm showing you it's
like the part of the project and our
project are made and also how you can
influence the quality of the project by
active active upstream and on the
project so that was past matters there
is a new type of competition in France
where you there is a site and you have
to
build with the developers with an
architects and with a team of people and
you have to beat the price but also a
price that will evolve over time a price
of the rents a price of the building so
it's not only during a project an
architectural project it's like giving a
big package with everything so this
project the main idea of this project so
it's a what we call in real estate a
prime site so it's on the River Seine
it's the River Seine and there is no
neighborhood I mean around this area
around like 15,000 euros per square
metre which is kind of Paris not so much
for London for Paris it's almost hire
surprise and what we decided with the
developers it's like because the site is
this and we decided that it was
impossible to beat this area because
it's a space which is like now belongs
to the public so what we decided to do
is like only building out of the project
and then making a kind of juridical
framework and complex financial model to
rent the other parts for 15 days and
then to give it back to the public 15
million euros it's very interesting
because we won against people who bet
with the price between 35 million and 15
million euros so it's reinvesting that
and maybe that's the first time that's a
bad one with a price which is not the
highest bid we go just make some I think
taking about money is with alcohol but
it's also really important and also it
gives you value of things so 50 million
for example is the price of the building
which is just
this is not from me this is from Costa
which is a real estate database and you
can see here like the building which is
like next road is like 15 Millions and
it's it's just to give you ideas of the
values of things enough of architecture
the we area in Paris with lot of social
housing and the competion was the same
so we and we the rest to social
activities and we make a lot of
alliances with the surroundings to be
sure that it's going to be part of the
project with 15,000 square metres no
relationship with no relationship with
the area but the project it's gotta go
Brown and this time we have decided to
client so with my office we we we bid
for the project as clients but we didn't
do it as a really naive way we met the
CEO of SNCF in Mobile which was like to
share order on the owner of the site and
then we also make a study about like who
owns this place always this place is
working because it's a huge site is
70,000 square meters in the house of
Paris so probably the last big you just
sites in Paris and what we saw during
the six months ease of studies it's like
it's a midst of shareholders it's a big
history and we'll complex history of and
and coats and everything so for us it
was clear that selling these sites to a
new developer was a big mistake
so what we try to do is we made a team
of architects but also developers CG
makers people with experience in doing
alternative ways of making cities so
freak was the architects and we discuss
for a long time about this project
because of the ability to build to make
some such a huge project but also the
ability to deal with the developer and
not be afraid of the ambiguity so that
was the price for the bid we are still
waiting for the answer but we had some
question about the price so we answered
the question
we made economic model we made juridical
framework and we are still waiting for
the answer right now but I think it's
the right price for that side actually
but thank you so much for all the
presentations and we will now move to
questions first can I ask a question I
was really intrigued with this idea
about ambiguity and I think also that
tile is maybe a bit too this a temporary
space so I'm curious what this word
ambiguity means both in terms of roles
different roles we can occupy and I know
for okay like huge with different
collaborators even with the same
collaborators sometimes have a different
role in that relationship so if you
could speak a little more about this
ambiguity I would be very curious to
hear about that and also the notion of
trust that I think also very much in
Finnish presentation spoke to so this
space of ambiguity how can we
if I buy any takers
so I think that just for the VTC for
instance like you have a building for a
short period of time where there is like
this time window for certain types of
collaborations and where I think I guess
you would both be the facilitator in
some way you would also be contributing
with content
so this transaction which is not
necessary based on money or this it's
more based on a trust that develops over
time how what is your experience
probably practice with the close
collaboration I guess with a lot of
different axes within an authority and
within a community
I just like to ask a question I think
and will you present freek as well it
makes me sort of think that also in
relation to what is an alliance and what
is the collaboration in this case it's
it's quite clearly an alliance and for
me what's potential where the ambiguity
for me lies in it is that it's an
alliance with potentially quite
dangerous
partner in a way and and you describe
the kind of role of the architect as
being slightly not at the center or
being slightly off center somehow which
is also very close to being completely
sidelined somehow during the course of
that process and I'm just quite curious
to hear how you would how you would try
to kind of mediate that in the process
of forming this alliance what what kind
of what kind of stops do you have to
make sure that that's something good
actually arises from the public out of
this and and and just not kind of a
reciprocal reciprocal range between you
and quite the dangerous developer in a
big commercial architect
I just want to open the discussion up
also to the floor so if anybody has
questions then there will be roving mics
and sorry and we have a second question
here so I'm a first-year so I don't know
the system but you keep saying so you
keep saying
the Alliance is for bringing people
together because it's we're in a
fractured Society but an alliance is
quite a negative word and you keep
saying being sidelined by the developer
or we have to gang up against the
developer so my question is what is the
Alliance for is the Alliance for
bringing people together is it for being
like thuggish in getting your way
because I always imagined it as ganging
up against someone else because
otherwise your community and an alliance
is saying there's an enemy kind of thing
I think we have a question over here
hello I'm working and studying at the
same time so I'm looking at potential
opportunities as like architect or
should you actually quit the job and do
something else so this discussion is
actually really inspiring so thank you
to all of you and my question is
probably to everyone in in the on the
panel it is about uncertainty that we
have today that we started with and
[Music]
number one is probably about uncertainty
is it now helpful for us as architects
to negotiate projects with the public
and private sector and if yes or no was
the difference and the second one is
what do you think happened don't they
let say post brexit UK and with European
experiences well what happens on that
side as well yeah that's probably the
question thank you
I mean uncertainty it's everywhere and I
think it's it's not something from our
time it has been always like this and
when you look at someone else you always
think he is more sure than you but in
fact it is in the same midst as you and
I would like to maybe about this
question of in certainty I would like to
take a bit from what Putin says about
like the developers like when you look
at them you have the impression that the
money gives them confidence and they are
like you know they're going to build big
things and everything but then when you
start to start to look at forecast and
cash flow like everything is uncertain
like the value of money is the least
certain things because it's valuate all
the time if you look at the value of
last week he dropped by five percenters
because like terrorism a wasn't able to
sign the breaks it
I mean there is no certainty and you
have to accept in certainty as a
condition but then is just like yeah how
do you do you evaluate in you and in
certainty and do you I do
are you sure about certain things and I
think it was really interesting about
aliens is because to form alliances you
have to be sure about at least one thing
why do you want to make this alien
season whether you want to go with all
these aliens is at some point and then
the rest is like just full of
uncertainty everywhere for this language
you are collaborating with such a range
of people within so many fields among
architects and I'm thinking in that
process of collaboration with such a
diverse bunch of people common language
or how do you with different
methodologies and different approaches
yeah I hope so
my question is just on the idea of um
the usefulness of ambiguity because we
know we I mean we've just been through
almost two years since the the vote for
brexit we're probably facing years and
years more of uncertainty and we know
that the more constructive ambiguity
that either political party engages in
in a sense the more Trust is eroded in
those who are speaking right because
there's a limit to how much you can just
say oh well we'll sort of that later on
or you use language which you know two
opposing parties can both find their own
meaning in so my question is what
register do you think we should be in a
sense trying to gain the trust of other
people is that the architects the extent
of architects ambition should be working
with in the wings trying to form little
alliances with local authorities or with
developers whoever or actually being in
the public and agitating almost on
behalf of that public whether or not you
actually have the public the trust of
the public to begin with so it's just
like that's which which domain should we
focus our ambition in because I don't
think it can be both and I don't think
as Finn says we can wait around for
consensus either
I think this ability to keep your ideas
but to decline its toward Republic is
really important it also makes you our
audiences are working at some point I
mean if you have this objective in this
vision then you have to know what's your
audience on how to trigger your audience
at some points to convince him because
you don't convince an architect the same
way as you convince the developers but
you can convince them for the same
project at some point
I think we've talked about final
question I was gonna say that
I mean I'm quite new to basically all of
this I'm really at the beginning of the
whole process and I was going to say
that when we talk about Alliance there
are two interpretations it can be a
positive and beneficial alliance or it
can be like you are saying a brutish and
quite negatively impacting alliance and
alliances can obviously be the
groundwork you're saying there's no
community alliances could be the future
of community so when we're trying to
build like an open atmosphere and we do
have opposing opposing forces to our
vision we can't always necessarily bring
those people around to our side or
understand their side or have a
compromise how do we kind of avoid being
the brutish Alliance when we have forces
opposing what we have as our vision and
that's really for everyone
I think on that beautiful node will end
tonight's conversation and thank you
Rory Lake puja then so much for this
discussion and we'll be back in the
spring for the last session out of three
but thank you so much everybody
also for joining the conversation
