yet another edition of the new canonical
histories it is 7:45 14th of February of
2019 for some each and every one of
those numbers data means something even
it might actually have some
signification some even might think of
love
some might think of time some may think
of some of these things that we consider
to be real when in fact probably are
just fictions wonderful fiction that we
have inherited time rituals and so the
question here is what do we do with
those and how do we take the moment that
we are here in this room to reflect
about about those codes about those
conditions but those are spaces that
actually we have inherited that should
in fact may be big question and maybe
put in doubt so what constitutes the
foundations in fact of all of us in our
spaces of learning and communicating who
we are where we are and where we are
going probably at the core of what an
institution like DAA an educational
institution is tasks to do and yet as
important as it is to provide the
foundations is to actually provide ways
to question to unveil other types of
being of a standing in this ground that
we called culture so what for me is
interesting is that the first time that
I met Francis was in fact in a factory
in a steel factory in China steel
factory that actually had been for more
than 50 years really producing some of
the elements that have been building the
buildings in a country that actually as
of today is they built the country this
building the most than anyone and what
was interesting about being that
factories that they were trying to
figure out how to redefine themselves
how to reconstitute themselves anew and
they were wise enough to have the person
who runs the most important institution
of art today and the person who runs the
smallest institution of art and
architecture then and to actually be
able to have the agility to identify two
people who had the core are trying to in
fact probably do that to reinvent
history and to produce new vector
of desire I won't tell you who Francis
is because Francis is someone who
actually everyone does known why someone
from the world of art will enter an
institutionalized like this one is
because in fact we have never cared
about labels but we have cared about
attitudes and the attitude that Francis
has brought into the world not only of
art but of culture to London but also to
the international way in which we
understand ourselves to their citizens
is one of the faience and an generosity
and it is with that generosity that she
represents that I would like to invite
you to help me welcoming her to this
whole DAA School of Architecture Thank
You Francis thank you Eva and you cited
our memorable meeting in Shanghai and I
suppose it's just worth saying that you
know as somebody works a very large
institution and has done for many years
actually where I've had my inspiration
and my moments of gosh we could do that
or this is how we might think
differently have almost always been with
very small grassroots institutions so
you know I rob and steal and put a bit
of dust on them but actually it's so
many small-scale artists curators
organisations who are driving so much
the change that we owe so much about -
so I wanted to talk first of all about
Tate Modern now and Tate Modern
for me is encapsulated by these two
images on the right hand side there's a
you know iconic work by Kandinsky which
has been in the collection for almost a
hundred years and it's a image made by
the artist on the eve of the Russian
Revolution it's a moment where artists
were as radical in their art as the
revolutionaries were in their politics
it's an image nonetheless where the
artists are withdrawing formally from
the real world and yet you can just see
in the middle of that picture can you
hear tell me you can't hear in the
middle of that picture which is so
abstract and dissolving into form you
can just see the depiction of a horse so
there is the kind of history
the equestrian motif in the history of
art on the left-hand side over 100 years
later Tania Bruguera Stalin's whisper in
a reference to the Russian Revolution
but here an artist from Cuba has
invested in the politics of her time as
Kandinsky was in his time but an artist
from outside the Western canon an artist
from the third world and an artist who
is rushing in their art towards an
embrace of the world so Timon for me is
kind of encapsulated in that
juxtaposition and an institution that
respects history that understands
history but understands the importance
of rethinking art history from the point
of view of the present so I wanted to
really talk I suppose about three issues
today from from all three issues that
affect the museum one is what we have in
our collection what museums collect the
second is what they choose to put on
display and the third thing of course is
about the knowledge the knowledge
systems the values and beliefs that the
kind of under pin the museum I want to
show you a snapshot of Tate in the 1990s
Tate around the time when I joined it it
was the National Gallery of British art
of five centuries of British art but
also international or foreign art as it
was then described from 1917 it was born
at the end of the 19th century into a
family of museums in London and like all
families it was squeezed and had to
fight for its space and it's space was
quite a narrow space it got fine art got
painting sculpture and something called
wops or works on paper it didn't get the
top if he didn't get design didn't get
architecture I didn't get ethnography so
a very sort of limited and kind of
notion of what constitutes studio
practice it was a single museum and just
looking at architecture that got a Greek
temple model based on the sort of idea
of Show and Tell of no
and experience but above all a Civic
space and National Museum existing for
public benefit with a collection owned
by the nation a lot of what we do comes
from that kind of foundational model of
being a National Museum and the very
much built its collection very much
built on the idea of a known art history
that was an art history that I was
taught when I was at Cambridge it was
not history that the tate began to
acquire in terms of international art
after 1917 and then was boosted in the
1920s by the support of great patrons
like Samuel Courtauld and then proceeded
to evolve over the century reflecting
the kind of interests of collectors the
the presence of a marketplace in the UK
the advocacy of art school teachers of
artists peoples fashion tastes and
prejudiced patriarchy race and plus if
it just subscribes to any kind of
history it was the Alfred Barr model and
here you see alpha bar was the founding
director of the Museum of Modern Art in
New York and really one of the very few
museum directors ever to set out their
understanding of art history and the
strategy behind the collecting of the
museum and this from the 1930s almost
became the sort of rumor for most
collections of Modern Art in Europe and
North America and that's why you see the
similarities when you walk into any
German regional Museum for example and
of course this model of isms of a kind
of progressive move towards different
forms of abstraction privileges form
over content privileges Europe and North
America over the rest of the world and
it was a model that underpinned not just
the way museums have thought about
history but of course underpinned the
way collectors collected the way the
market
place operated the art history that art
historians wrote and that art history
was very visibly enshrined in the
presentation about at museums throughout
the 20th century and Tate was no
exception of course it was when you look
at the lists of things on display and
and plans of galleries a history of the
endeavors of white men working almost
exclusively in studios with easels and
often looking at naked women it was
about painting and the history of
painting and the history of formalism
now that history was under assault in my
first decade at age it was under assault
from a generation or several generations
of black artists who wanted to be part
of the history and this an image of a
very important exhibition that took
place at the Hayward Gallery in 1989
under the aegis refuge Irene bringing
together around 40 artists mostly of
afro-caribbean descent and making a very
very powerful case about their exclusion
from that art history but it was also a
history that was being challenged abroad
this was incredibly important exhibition
at the Pompidou Center in the same year
I mean 89 comes through again and again
as a pivotal moment in the history of
the world and the history of culture an
exhibition that brought African art both
what we have called tribal or primitive
primitive art that contemporary artists
into relationships with European artists
and was strongly criticized for the lack
of context and the kind of what's the
word the reduction of the reduction or
depletion of context from those African
works but a project that still remains
controversial today and was really hotly
debated in London and at Tate and then
of course there were the there was the
activism of artists the radical
feminists the guerrilla girls who were
1995 highly visible throughout the 1980s
not just visible but writing letters to
people like me
and then the conversations that I had as
a curator in the 1980s with artists like
Helen Chadwick the first artist I made a
studio visit to who argued strongly for
the kind of imprint of the female body
on the minimalist cube and was a really
kind of a quiet activist on behalf of
feminism and a rethinking about history
artists like Sonia Boyce dealing with
identity and the construction of both
white and black identities in the space
of media in the UK and then further from
a further beyond that there was the
whole questions about what constituted
fine art and it was fine for tape to
acquire a work by Sonia Boyce a
photograph but somehow not fine to
acquire a work by Keith Arnott who came
out of a documented tradition this is a
great work I am a real artist Keith
Arnott was saying that when I made my
first proposal it takes to acquire works
of art by Keith's art Arnott I was told
by my boss he is not an artist
we finally quad Keith's works just a few
years ago so there was enormous debate
and discussion of Tate about the
suitability of our history to reflect
the present increasingly contested space
of the of the artist and while that
debate was going on and it is a funny
time night in history I do remember the
early nineties being an incredibly
interesting vibrant dynamic time we had
many arguments of a photography of a
feminism / of a non-western art but this
was the radical rehang that we embraced
in 1992 and when I look at this now I
find it incredibly difficult to see its
radicalism and you know you look at the
use of words like primitive we would not
use that word now without a long
discourse about why we were using it I
think it's talked about masters
somewhere masters of whatever news it's
absolutely kind of fraught with its peer
but what was radical about it and I do
remember this it kind of shocked 8 to
its foundations was the collapsing of
art history into the northwest corner of
the building if you look at the plan
Nick Cerreta who was then a new director
decided to take 3/4 this historic
institution devoted to the history of
British art since you know the Stewart's
and there's a beef and painting and
collapse all that into a quarter and it
was an incredibly important manifesto
moment for the really turning the museum
around so the museum was less about
history than it was more about the
contemporary and that was incredibly
exciting and for people like me who are
young curators who are interested in
contemporary art we just thought it was
our moment then in 1992 the same year
that actually what looked looks now very
conventional how was installed in Tate
there was a discussions were happening
about the need for a new Tate we had
outlived as you could see from that very
very little room on this plan for
Contemporary Art just if you look at the
bottom run of galleries which is the
North East quadrant as they call it you
have boys in the corner to voices we had
a lot of boys
we loved German art boys boys had a horn
and then Gaston
Bassets de Kooning incredibly German in
fact I mean maybe that reflects
something about the presence of and
connections between commercial galleries
in Germany and the predominance of Anton
da face for example in London very
interesting I haven't thought about that
before but it was very very little room
for contemporary there was lots for
modern but I mean we were squeezed the
whole of the 90s was in one room there
so we were desperately in need of new
space we needed new spaces and new types
of spaces artists were working in video
and film and installation audiences were
hungry for for lectures for learning
remember pivotal or seminal lecture an
accelerator gave entitled experience or
interpretation and that was the moment
that we embraced interpretation that the
museum wasn't just a place to wander
through empty galleries and have an
erratic experience that it wasn't it was
a place to learn and think about our so
there are many drivers behind the need
for a second Tate in London and in 1992
at Richard Francis who had been the
director of Liverpool was invited to do
a sort of master plan study a paper to
persuade the trustees that we needed a
new Tate Modern and you need a new Tate
a secondary Tate and to make the case
but what kind of taste it would be and
what is really interesting in this
document which I only reconnected with
very recently it was stuck in the
archives I'd completely forgotten about
it was what Richard says about I think
it's in the first second third or fourth
paragraph down he talks about Alfred
Barr most modern art museums on the
principles established by Alfred
Barney's Modern Art in New York but he
then says an absolute crucially this
view has now been replaced by a
postmodern view that gives substantial
status to art outside the narrow
modernist Canon especially traditional
art and work by previously to score
guarded groups women that's us
some Europeans I'd like to know which
Europeans were not included and third
world artists but it is incredible
really at the you know at the heart of
the establishment this has been
enshrined as an ambition in 1992 and
we're still talking about it and it's
still a subject of controversy so that
was the background to the new Tate
Modern these are two images for I've got
a few images of the building because
this is the a
and I'm presuming many of you were born
after Tate Modern was built and maybe
have never seen these wonderful images
of the power station belching out smoke
in the 1970s and then as we found it in
the 90s decommissioned but still full of
its industrial contents and this was the
project that I an Ivana blast Wieck and
Cara Hall both now directors of eminent
institutions in London were handed as a
kind of curatorial project like what are
you going to do with the collection and
what exhibitions are you going to do in
this space and we had a two-year period
period to come up with a solution and
the first year was a year of just having
ideas and talking to people and we
during that first year where we're also
working with artists we really came to
the conclusion that at the beginning of
the 21st century we could have a new
kind of Museum we could have a
contemporary space it might be relevant
to people it might be open it might be
full of debates it would it would tease
out art it wouldn't limit it and above
all we were acknowledging that great art
was being made all over the world in the
biennials and exhibitions that we were
seeing on our travels and we were aware
because of that kind of implicitly that
we couldn't any longer tell a single
narrative of 20th century arts but of
course the paradox was that we were very
aware that our collection spoke to a
single narrative so the one thing that
we knew we could disrupt was the
framework of that narrative and we could
use the displays to ask questions so a
kind of we decided to adopt a reversal
of that kind of show-and-tell model and
use the displays as a kind of laboratory
we were very excited by this idea and
short digress on architecture Hertzog
and demure on where the architects are
pointed to adapt this building they were
appointed principally because they were
young and dynamic practice but they also
then
proposal respected the kind of
fundamental characteristics of the
architecture the building its facade
it's incredible brickwork and it's
chimney and at the same time that they
were doing that and then we were having
all these exciting discussions in 1997
and putting great vision papers to our
trustees we were also working on the
Tate Gallery centenary displays I just
wanted to show you this because what's
so fascinating is that again it's this
disjunction within the organization this
is a display as we presented it to the
world in 1997 the year we decided on our
radical displays this is absolutely
chronological and I think it's
absolutely British and European not a
single artist from outside the NATO
alliance and only three works by women
so that was the book that was what we
were that was the story that we were
telling the world this is the
architecture that we had to play with in
exactly that same year and I think we
were we were guided by our ambitions but
also by the structures that we were
given and if you look at this cutaway of
the floors in the what is now called
currently called the Natalie Bell
building the boiler house the old
building some people call that you see
we were given two floors three and five
for the collection with the intervening
floor for temporary exhibitions and the
way the architects constructed those
floors and they were they were guided or
restricted by the very narrow in a floor
plan of the original building this is
the old boiler house but all the
machinery was there they came up with
four groups of galleries so we had four
kind of chapters and so right from the
start of thinking about what to do with
the collection we decided to have four
different displays not a we knew we
couldn't have a single unordered we
really want a walkthrough but the
architecture informed the structure of
the displays as we evolved them there's
a picture of Tate Modern as it opened in
2000 and some of you are
you remember there's some others will
that we opened with what we call a
thematic hang in 2004 different versions
or four different approaches to the 20th
century each one that took a sort of
broadly speaking kind of familiar can
kind of genre idea the landscape still
life history they're new and played it
out in an expanded field of the 20th and
almost 21st century and as I said
earlier that was about disrupting the
the framework we were implicitly aware
that we wanted to tell lots of stories
[Music]
within the displays itself we evolved a
number of quite distinct types of
displays so that when you walked into it
each gallery we hoped you would have a
sense that oh this is a one-person room
this is a historical room this is a
thematic room and I just wanted to show
you two that in a way had have had a
legacy first was we took some of the
sort of more conventional isms within
the collection and taste collection for
all sorts of reasons to do with the fact
that we are in London between Paris and
New York has the collection has evolved
principally around their kind of
avant-garde isms so cubism futurism most
strong holdings surrealism are very
strong there's a kind of post-war
Abstract Expressionism are formal
because those were the moments where
British artists most fully or seem to
most fully engage with continental
Europe and North America but we were
also now very aware because surrealism
isn't just a European story nor was it
just a story of the 1920s so in relation
to things like surrealism we try to
offer stretched histories so this was
one of those displays that took a number
of iconic works from a surrealist
Holdings here darlie's lobster telephone
and looked at the way artists across
different generations of places have
explored the kind of uncanny through
object pieces another typology that we
evolved which was hugely controversial
at the time the pairing the dialogue
taking artists from very different parts
of the time frame and and trying to
create a dialogue with them was of huge
discussion and debate at the time people
hated the idea that Monet and Richard
long could've had anything to say to
each other of course Richard Locke
himself who came and made the work on
the wall loved the connection and saw
the he saw immediately and believed the
expansiveness of Monet's work and the
kind of absence of a Center or edge in
that work as it came to his walking into
the landscape but those those two types
of displays these longer histories and
these conversation pieces have stayed
with us and this is the conversation
piece has become a sort of key way of
offering our you know interpretation
it's it's just like the art historical
lecture juxtaposition of two slides why
are they together and it's a very feels
like a very effective way of introducing
people to unfamiliar unfamiliar items
and so what we did at Tate Modern in
2000 to encourage people who might be
passionate about the early 20th century
to give a thought for the later 20th
century people who have fashioned
passionate about contemporary art to
think actually there are genealogists
here and there are debates that spanned
centuries that artists don't just live
in the moment I just thought I share
that with you and we're talking about
the impact of what people like I do on
art history anything we do at a museum
is incredibly public and you can publish
a scholarly tome and you can get a
review in the Burlington magazine it
might be a you know critical review and
you can maybe just put it on one side
but what we do at Tate is absolutely in
the public eye and the opening displays
at Tate Modern weren't completely and
utterly torn to shreds by the critical
press and I do remember that the shock
of that response
it is the most intensely curated
permanent collection I have ever seen a
triumph of the craft I thought rather
proud of that one but I don't think the
critic meant it in a kind way of course
the the permanent collection was only
one thing and I said we're very aware of
its deficiencies so at the same time we
wanted our exhibition program to point
to other histories point to a world
beyond London the world beyond a Europe
and America so the the first exhibition
at Tate Modern in 2001 was kind of like
a manifesto for that wider world call it
decolonization call it the canonization
whatever but it was a just setting out
the case that across the world there
were centers of innovation and
incredible creativity far from the
cosmopolitan city in which we as Tate
Modern existed so dead lagos Mumbai
Tokyo Rio Moscow Vienna Paris a whole
range of cities over the course the 20th
century where we tried to demonstrate
how how these could cauldron moments
happen how artists working together
networking create extraordinary moments
of time and that too was received with
mixed well no no what the views weren't
mixed entirely debilitating political
correctness has been visited upon this
exhibition as a result of the muddled
Polytechnic thinking that went into
shaping it polytechnics no longer exists
but I can tell you that was a term of
incredible derision anyway we were we
were we were lowered but not after you
dismayed and certainly our pathway did
not did not divert I mean of course the
learnings were many from that opening
year big reality was just how much is
invested in the Canon you know we I did
I learnt the Canon at Cambridge it was
my art history and here I was on
willingly but there were many many
people who didn't want to unlearn it
complex notions of value not just
artistic value but of course intrinsic
value is at the heart of this and
monetary value people have invested you
know they have their fortunes in
collecting a history that take models
seem to be deconstructing and of course
then just that risk of moving away from
this very secure known art history where
you could say that's a very important
work and determining it explain why it
was in formal terms the displacement of
much-loved treasures from from Tate
people were upset about not finding the
thing that they loved in the old Tate
and of course their new and unfamiliar
works and what was so interesting of
course is I think at the time is that we
thought the world of art history would
embrace this but art historians were
horrified because what we've done is
we've taken away their lovely dusty
library which they could occupy and move
things around with their students so we
had put out a proposition that I think
they found very difficult to respond to
and I'm not saying what we were doing
was necessarily in all cases who weren't
mr. telling stories that I would want to
tell again but it was really about
upsetting upsetting the the kind of the
familiar the expected the known and it
is worth remembering that at this time
other museums were also engaging with a
much kind of bigger sense of the
contemporary and I remember in those
first years also going to Pompidou and
MoMA to just name the two that we kind
of you know we we love and we are a
dialogue with and both those
institutions had chosen to keep their
cannon absolutely in place and then
around 96 between 1960 and 1980 go
contemporary so they had adopted the
sort of idea of a kind of Fisher the
kind of modernist and postmodernist
thing and that was something that we
absolutely had decided not to do so
there was a lot of uncertainty on our
part but there was also an excitement
that we had still had a lot to do
what we really had to do was to earn a
great deal of money and go out there and
start putting our money where our mouth
was we couldn't just we wanted to really
change the collection we wanted to
change its contents not just use old
wine in new bottles so tentatively first
in the early part of this century when
we established an initiative to collect
Latin American art under pressure from
our American collecting friends we
slowly and under my leadership as then
director of the International collection
set up this cluster of interest groups
we call the acquisition committees
abbreviations they're learn react Mack
the sack a pack and ECC as Europe in the
middle and photography is just an
anomaly because we because of Keith are
nuts I wanted to have a photography
group because of Keith not feeling that
we acknowledge Tim as an artist
all these groups are groups of patrons
who give us money and who support
initiatives to buy art in that region
supported by curators and curatorial
skills and this process the structure
has taken about 10 years to build but
it's sustainable now and is finally
driving real difference in the
collection and I think you when you come
to take modern at the moment you will
see that of course the challenge was not
just to change the statistics not just
to show that we had three percent of the
collection from Russia or four percent
from Africa to balance off the sixty
percent from North America but actually
to try and rethink the model of what it
means to be international art we wanted
to a foreground the contemporary we've
wanted a foreground the contemporary to
reflect the diversity of art now across
multiple centers in the world the fact
that great art was being made in Beijing
in
Istanbul or in Lagos but equally we
wanted to explore unlike moment and
Pompidou the genealogies of those
contemporary practices and where
possible create conversations between
those kind of new histories and the old
so the collection has grown vacant
organically around the idea of what I
would call kind of multiple modernity
and in all this us other museums and art
history itself is sort of in our
uncharted territory but the the way that
we've evolved individual acquisitions
and thinking around places has has been
informed by a number of different art
histories and a number of art historians
and thinkers so there there are models
for understanding and reframing art
history if they're even if they're in
lieu of a kind of totalizing model so
that the Brazilian notion of
anthropology from the 1920s the idea of
cannibalizing ingesting European
modernism for what was useful for
Brazilian needs the Edward Casals idea
around cosmopolitan cultures Paul
Gilroy's notion of the black Atlantic
based on the system of cultural exchange
part emitters envisage description of
virtual cosmopolitanism in relation to
Indian modernism but other people are
now talking about rooted and mesh
syncretic or hybrid modernism's yielding
lots of comparative modernity z'
reflecting a kind of polycentric world
and those models have served us so well
so when we talk about broadening the
history of art and diversifying it
that's what we sort of mean at Tate
Modern and just very briefly to just
give you three examples that of works
that have come through our African
Initiative fantastic painting by Ibrahim
el Salahi sudan sudanese modernist who
trained at the swayed in the united six
seas and then went back to the sudan as
somebody who's self-consciously sought
to create a modern voice for african art
and it's a it's a it's a work all his
work that draws on and his influence by
I artists like Graham Sutherland and
Francis Bacon but beyond that what he's
really doing is reappropriation at the
early 20th century appropriation of
African tribal art and he's
reappropriation at Indus combining it
with images from from the African desert
and Islamic calligraphy into a kind of
modern a manifesto for African modernism
in dialogue with that I suppose in a
work that I seems to speak in from a
contemporary perspective to those same
histories is cataratas untitled guard hi
from 2009 and a work that is on view at
Tate Modern at the moment kadia show
just opened Heywood gallery last night
which is why I thought I was showed this
but this is a beautiful piece made out
of couscous and refers to a Corbusier
it's a picture of Corbusier in the back
there Corbusier seminal visit to Algeria
in at the end of 1930s where he
discovered the kind of desert motorbike
architecture which then imbued his own
understanding of domestic modular living
and of course an architecture that then
has had a profound impact on European
and North American architecture in the
20th century so again that idea of core
buzias appropriation being
reappropriation by contemporary artists
and finally in relation to africa the
kind of agency and urgency of younger
African artists now this is a young
artist causa Nellie Moore honey who
works in photography but also in
activism in in her communities who is
claiming an incredibly important space
the kind of lived experience in South
Africa there's not just about geography
it's about pushing the walls of the
Canon in lots of ways you know
interestingly this prose this project to
look beyond the familiar has has almost
by default revealed generations of
really interesting female artists often
working outside
market structure some like Suzanne lacy
when we acquired her work in the 80s was
unrepresented by a gallery she somebody
who works with community she's a
committed feminist but she's also a
maker and works with live arts and a new
parish social engaged practice from
Romania in the 1960s and these artists
are there and vivid and incredibly
important in their place if you ask for
younger Romanian artist who is their
mentor who is their guiding light many
will say Anna Lou posh but artists who
had never shown really outside Eastern
Europe Magdalena
epic Anna extraordinarily
important artist redefining the nature
of fiber art from the 1960s onwards and
her work been resonating in practices
across the world is marina mukajee's
work recently acquired artist who was
based in Debit delhi until her recent
death and so there's a kind of
curatorial appetite behind this
exploration but it's not an exploration
I think in a colonial sense it's very
much about working with local people
local collectors and local institutions
and for all of these artists being so
shown in London at the heart of this
bigger history is incredibly important
as it indeed is for the collectors who
support their work and support these
initiatives so there's been a decade of
building this kind of collection and the
collection has moved from that sense of
North America Western Europe being the
the territory that we opened Tate Modern
in in 2002 being a kind of polycentric
scattering of creativity across the
world now and I think that's incredibly
exciting is not always apparent what we
do with that and how we grow it but it
gives us an astonishingly rich base to
ask some really important questions one
of the things that ships the ships the
paradigm at institutions is when you
have a new building a new structure and
in 2000 with that new building we were
really in able to reinvent ourselves and
by the pressures and labors and stresses
of fundraising by bus that having a new
building 2016 sort of enabled us to do a
little bit more only 16-yard years after
the opening and kind of fulfill some of
the ambitions that we had at least you
know manifesto did in 2000 we needed a
new building for all sorts of reasons
the old new building was never big
enough it was wasn't a fit for purpose
building and a new building the
Blavatnik building has given us space
really to think about the contemporary
and live and about audiences in a very
real way for the first time in terms of
the collection it's allowed us to do
there are two things one in the boiler
house we were able to completely explore
those new diversified geographically
spread histories of modernism that we've
been trying to build in the collection
and in the switch house now called the
Blavatnik building we've had a much more
contemporary focus where we've I've
talked about this moving away from the
cannon in two ways one in terms of
geography but also in terms of media so
the switch has has really allowed us to
show how different media have come into
play over the last sixty years or so and
in the new building that's been very
much bookended by the extrordinary tank
spaces and the bottom which are devoted
to live art and then on level fire this
experimental space quartet exchange so
the whole vision of the new building at
Tate Modern was very much this idea of
where not became active since the 1960s
but the old building is where we tell I
suppose the more you'd say traditional
but the more historic narratives and
we've tried curatorial e to create a
number of ways of looking from different
perspectives and like that it's that
idea that you can look on the world from
a different place and the same material
tells different stories I think is one
that's very exciting so we've had a
series of displays
the boiler house that are subtitled a
view from this is a view from Sao Paulo
where the South parlor biennials in the
1950s onwards brought together Brazilian
artists but also avant-garde artists
from all over the world and you just
begin to see abstraction and
constructivism in a different way when
you look at a display like this you see
Ellsworth Kelly on the left hand side of
the image there the colored work an
American very famous American abstract
painter in dialogue with Mira chandelle
very famous Brazilian abstract painting
you realize that Ellsworth Kelly who
spent a lot of time in Paris after the
war where there were also lots of
Brazilian artists knows something of his
sort of I know the kinetise ISM of his
work to that relationship with Latin
America and it's the story that needs to
be written a view from Tokyo between men
and matter when American artists were
invited to Tokyo in 1970 working with a
group of avant-garde American artists
and fantastic resonance between Carl
Andre which is epipen Tony and the
good.i group and monitor artists at that
time took a map suit and new family on
the on the floor here and then finally
review from Zagreb unexpectedly Zagreb
was a hotbed of kinetise ISM in the
1960s so when you think bridget riley
victor acerola factory Vasarely Kings
Road actually Zagreb was really where it
was all happening we you know we have a
tendency to take ownership but some of
these displays are kind of distributing
that ownership or returning it to where
it where it started just a very few
slides to show you what certain
movements look like for Tate Modern or
but for the new building and after new
building this was pop as you saw in 2008
totally American of Gretchen Berg Art's
Faja Warhol this is pop no pop myths pop
myths that involve art from
Columbia from from New York of course
but from Eastern Europe and with
published tiny town of Olli of course
from Iran as well and you realize that
that engagement with the commercial
imagery with the kind of technological
world happened in both behind the Iron
Curtain in front of the Iron Curtain
East Worth and across the global south
broadly speaking in the same decade of
the 96 and 70s and then around
minimalism again as it used to be in
2006 purely American almost purely
sculptural but of course that minimal
tendency mum wouldn't call it minimalism
because minimalism was the the invention
of an American critic you see in many
parts of the world from the 1960s as
artists are beginning to move from the
ideal of kind of pictorialism of the
flat object on the wall to working with
industrial materials aesthetics and the
kind of agency of the human body in
completing the work so those are kind of
curatorial conceits for exploring this
bigger broader view I realized I've got
a lot to talk about maybe I need to give
another mixture but and another another
example of that material just just this
in 2006 this was the post-war moment
when in the wake of the Second World War
artists started making inscribing their
body and abstract gestures and of course
once you look across the world this what
also is happening is this interrogation
of the human figure in the aftermath
noctus of the second world war because
of course the Second World War did not
impact the world in its entirety but the
bomb and the beginnings of
decolonization profoundly unsettling
moments that where you see this
interrogation of the figure and almost
its disappearance and that's the context
in which we've hung the ibrahim al
Salahi and i think they've just
extraordinary set against the fantastic
german rachet sculptures in front of
them and they speak to each other this
kind of hybrid humanity or damaged
humanity
and of course that sense of art beyond
painting sculpture the live the
performative performance inscribed into
the permanent collection this is a work
we've recently acquired of these
conjoined twins by the Brazilian
modernist artists Unger and craft
through those pioneering Eastern
European and Indian practitioners craft
is now at the center of what we do I'm
not sure how any of this impact on art
history but I think it does show that a
museum can be a place of research and a
gallery we're evolving I suppose what
you'd almost call the kind of type of
practice based research how it impacts
an art history as I say I don't quite
know but we are part of a conversation
with our colleagues in the academic
world and of course we're part of a
conversation with a marketplace and one
of the more problematic aspects I think
of what we are doing is that many of
these artists first seen at Tate Modern
will be second scene at freeze Art Fair
so that's something that we're now you
know concerned about but we do follow up
I'm just whizzing through another way
that we build that knowledge to the
collection is taking things that have
become important within the collection
and they're surfacing them through major
exhibitions so sort of a Nation about
art a new age of black power came out of
research around the collection Annie
Albers the recently closed show of
artists who worked in weaving fine art
and industrial design puts kind of
fabric back into the heart of modernism
and that extending the collection into
exhibitions will continue one project
that I'm excited about is our research
project to look at global surrealism
which will land as an exhibition in a
couple of years time and supporting that
work
now act 8 any kind of long evolutionary
journey from those early days at the end
of 90s is a full-blown Research Center
supported by Hyundai where we have six
years and quite a lot of financial
support to kind of build the academic
rigor and first kind of primary research
around what we have done and what we're
doing the difference here between a
university research center and a tape
Research Center is the outcomes of this
research will be seen in our
acquisitions our displays and our
acquisition exhibition so that is
finally we have a kind of way not just
of self-reflecting but but testing out
and trying art in in a really I hope
rigorous way and involving lots of other
people in that discussion just before
take modern open Stewart Hall at a
lecture at the old tech area which we
are all attending talks about the need
for museums to see their collections as
temporary stabilizations
not as fixed illustrations of history
and to acknowledge the shifting value of
truth the shifting nature of truth and
value and to be explicit about their
exclusions and I think that is that that
has been that has very much stayed with
me that we need to be very explicit
about what we can't do as well as very
you know very excited about what we can
do but it also reminds me that museums
need to continuously reflect and having
had these two great moments of building
projects where we were really in a
change was facilitated I'm left now with
wondering how do we move forward because
once you inscribe your values
transnational polycentric multiple
modernity is the tendency then is for
everything to reinforce those values but
every now and again you have to kind of
get a spanner and threads in the works
or you know throw up
a stone into a pool and see where the
ripples take you and chance and
happenstance unit comes sometimes to our
rescue and I just really wanted to end
by talking about something that's come
out of the bloom and begins in a rather
prosaic fashion five years ago Qantas
that came to us Qantas T a nine people
and they were winding up a foundation
and they had about five million pounds
and they had this idea that the tape
could buy some work in collaboration
with the Museum of Contemporary Art in
Sydney and it would be Australian art
and Australia has always been one of our
exclusions is a huge continent is very
far away and it has this fascinating but
deeply complex and kind of like how do
we get through our heads around history
in relation to First Nation Aboriginal
art but this just seemed like too good
an opportunity not to challenge
ourselves and to do something with it so
accepted their brief and worked very
closely with our colleagues in Sydney at
the MCA to originate a group of works
that would support their collecting
vision and support ours and one of the
first artists that we acquired was a
work by two works by Gordon Bennett and
Gordon Bennett whose work I've been
captivated by when I first saw it and
burn in a number of years before this is
somebody who was a Celtic and Aboriginal
descent but he only discovered that his
as it went native hybridity in his teens
and he's always been very interested in
the interplay in his own kind of life
experience between these two things so
we bought two works one that kind of
lends itself to a more traditional
Aboriginal context on the right with
this strong geometric patterning and
then the other on the left which is an
image which relates to a famous
engraving of Captain Cook's arrival on
the continent and and then has this very
strong sort of formalist structure which
is a little bit like a male yo vich but
actually as in fact in the colours of
the Aboriginal flag and when you see the
the painting in real life you can see in
the red Aboriginal servant holding out a
tray so really powerful work in terms of
its content and we were very excited by
this the kind of activism within this
work that also has that kind of sense of
hybridity of a kind of modernist
aesthetic under and/or could locally
root it and in the second artists who
work that we acquired was this work by
richard bell again what we would call an
urban Aboriginal artists who's
absolutely engaged with issues of land
rights and this work in particular at
the Embassy refers to a very powerful a
moment of activism in 1972 where artists
and protesters occupied the space
outside the Parliament building in
Canberra and had all sorts of debates
and speeches about identity and place
and ownership and race and oppression
and that work is now coming into text
collection and next year will be
installed in the Turbine Hall as a space
of debates where we could talk about
some of those things so the issues that
are happening in the research space come
to the fore and become part of the
public space but the spanner in the
works was the offer to gift us three
works by a First Nation Aboriginal
artists working in a community which
feel to many people even within the Tate
unfound
uh none kind of located
within the collection so the offer to
gift created a really really interesting
dialogue between curators who felt
horrified that we Cora Phi but that this
was not for where's the modern here
where's the contemporary and this very
traditional practice and others who felt
I think like I am feeling now that here
is a contemporary Aboriginal artists
whose work connects to her sense of
identity with the land in the here and
now and it's her form of activism and
it's a form of activism that's very
prevalent in Australia so it's been a
contested acquisition but we have
accepted gladly the work and and what it
does like so many works that come into
the collection and this is where the
museum becomes a space of debate and the
driving art history it asks us that
question asks us a rephrase the question
of who controls the Gateway to
contemporary and modern art which
actually is relevant to all of us I'm
going to stop there I could do another
lecture about where that takes us
but I hope that gives you a sense of the
journey ongoing journey and our current
resting point thank you
[Applause]
thank you one of the things that somehow
just the sparkle to this conversation is
when you say that the collection of an
institution like the Tate or any other
one is a is a flickering moment with
stabilization but in fact one should
regard them as temporary in some way
maybe another lecture that we might
invite you to come and join us would be
about the acquisitions because one
writes history by acquiring works but
what happens when one faces me two
movements when one faces issues of like
corruption when one faces issues of like
years of power how doesn't an art
institution like Tate deal with it and
can you talk about it well I guess I
will we should have another lecture or
debate about that and I think it will
become a more real question over the
coming years for two reasons
well maybe it's one reason it's a it's a
question of resource you know how how
far can a collection grow without being
continuously shown there all those sorts
of issues but what I do my own
experience of working with with this
collection is that because you're in a
trajectory which is always moving in
your context is always moving actually
what you discover about the collection
changes over time so that when I looked
in in great depth at the collection in
the 90s and thought I'd made some
fantastic discoveries I've been amazed
by younger colleagues who've now done
the same thing and discovered other
things that I didn't even notice and
that's for example you know I had yeast
inherit wasn't on my radar
in 2000 but we acquired for all sorts of
reasons quite a lot of Eastern European
art the British Council was very active
in fostering connections between the two
the Arts Council did a number of shows
one of my predecessors as the director
of the collection was obsessed by
Eastern European art so actually there's
a really interesting group of times I
think the collection is a kind of
archive it's a history it's its own
history and I think institutional
history is really interesting but it
also is a
resource that you can continuously move
things out of and back into when
somebody said to me when we were opening
the new Tate Modern in 2016 how can how
can can we really open without Twombly
and I said well Trombley safe in the
storage for the time being I don't think
I would have felt so comfortable had I
said we're selling tombliboo cuz he's
too American you know so I like that
idea that you can go back and you know
it's your your larder I'm sure that
there are plenty of questions in the
audience if what they haven't tons of
them in my pocket so we have a question
over there oh that's a nice idea thank
you there's not a danger confusing a
museum with the Coons Tyler
the conceit Allah is an exhibition hall
for temporary exhibitions and it's were
lots of tactical moves can be made
critical questions and issues raised
Museum on the other hand is a fixed item
and in the end it cannot do without the
concept of current no Canon no museum
because there must be a criterion of
conclusion
and when you say the Twombly is in the
is in the basements in the storage
that's nice but what is the criterion
for going into the storage at all well
there's a very good questions firstly to
record at acknowledge actually the you
make you make a good point about
Castellers and I think the principle
influences on how we adapted the new
tech modern were exhibition models and
there is no question that we weren't
creating in a way a kind of hybrid
between the museum and the controller
the museum and the exhibition space and
we were taking that sense of asking a
question and we were taking the the in a
way that the temporalities of the
exhibition and grafting that onto a
museum because although we have a
permanent collection it is permanently
changing and I would just I suppose take
issue with the idea that a museum should
have a fixed story and a Canon and I
think there's that now we live in a city
where 48% of our neighbors or BME we
have an enormous view diverse community
here who bring histories of different
continents different cities different
cultures different spiritual beliefs
different understandings of time
different comprehensions of the universe
and as a National Museum they all need
to have an opportunity to feel a
connection between what we do with our
collection and their lived experience so
I think for London in relation to Tate
Modern that idea is an idea of the past
and I personally feel very you know
committed to the idea that the with this
is a space that questions all canons and
as a space for shedding new
and making fresh connections between
things so yes you're right
I just wanted to ask about what kind of
goes on behind the the gallery and the
exhibition space in terms of
decolonizing
the infrastructure of the museum and the
the staffing hoo-hoos in brilliant it's
a brilliant question of course it's a
little bit you know we can't really
decolonize within a capitalist society
but the first thing we need to do is
change the institution and again museums
are like well not juggernauts because
they can go quite fast liners you know
they go very very slowly and they change
very slowly but so there are areas of
the tape which are changing very slowly
so if you come to the tape before 10
o'clock in the morning then most of the
staff are be AME if you come after 10
o'clock in the morning more of them look
like me but there are strong staff
networks on the tape that cover both
race and sexuality and other as it were
interest groups or lived experience and
the dynamic from those groups is really
interesting so at take Britain for
example there two initiatives there are
a number of walk throughs the gallery
with different perspectives so although
the gallery itself is as it wont
decolonizing you can do a walk through
the history of black British art or you
can do a queer walk through history and
on my way today to take modern I had an
email from our digital team saying
they'd been it's a real interest in that
Tate Modern us having a walk through for
experiences of immigration and they want
to do a walk through that will highlight
work by artists first-generation
immigrant artists or second generation
immigrant artists whose work speak of
that space so there's quite a lot which
I suppose you could call it sort of
micro histories or the more
granular textual interpretation it's
happening but that the real thing that
has to happen is to create content
makers whose knowledge matches their
experience and experience matches the
diversity of affection and that will
take a long time especially given our
current educational system in the UK
which we're probably going to have to
bypass in some ways if we're gonna do so
look to ask the question about space and
art and I think it was quite interesting
what was said when you when you said
told us the story about 1992 and that
being a year when there was a very clear
reason why you needed more space and
then I guess 2006 was kind of taking
full circle that need and you know
increasing diversity and things like
that but this kind of need for more
space you know I think it's an
interesting to think about how far it
goes and I think I guess my question
would be what would drive the need for
the next big Tate somewhere else and
where would that tape be I mean would it
can it just be a big warehouse or what
would the new Tate Modern in 2016 wasn't
my conception there are all sorts of
reasons why we had to build that
building one of which obviously that
there were some deficiencies with the
old building but the other and it's this
is so purely you know context is that
when we arrived in this neighborhood in
Bankside it was quite a rundown area and
Tate Modern had his instant impact on
the urban surroundings and the
developers came in and it's the various
occult contested space because of some
balls and we realized very early on that
if we didn't build we wouldn't be able
to build so that sounds silly real
estate was driven but so in a way
don't and we will we didn't need it when
we got it we didn't really need it we
weren't absolutely hungry for it but it
future proof is proof sauce but I think
the the feeling across the institution
is that bricks over no more bricks so
now we work with arts and people we
don't need bricks and I'm certainly
convinced that what we what happens
outside the institution will now affect
will be just as important as what
happens inside the bricks so I really
think that brick building is over for
many museums sound sustainable but the
kind of space that will be needed I mean
I guess how how will the art well it
might be the way the art develops of
course to a degree the spaces we've got
a space is driven by artists needs but
just at the moment it feels like the
energy much of the energy and art
practices in intangible things in
working with people and working with
ideas is working outside the institution
in working with artists into
interdisciplinary conversations artists
and architects the digital world is that
world on the absolute verge of parties
are on the verge of making interesting
things digitally so it just doesn't feel
as if the next 10 20 30 years will about
will be about physical stuff maybe as a
last question because we have our
reception upstairs and week maybe we can
keep on talking is there more questions
here but and I think it has to do with
some of the images and some of the works
that you showed and it's really
interesting because I do believe that we
don't need more museums we have billions
of museums built around the world that
have no collections that have no
directors that have no program and so
the question is the ultimate dream know
that the art would actually exist within
the cities in every single space of our
daily lives is one that we might all
share the question is is what art we
produce what are doing doors what are do
we allow to touch us
maybe going back to some of the points
of talking about Aboriginal art in
Australia that probably is one of the
most difficult ones that I actually have
encountered from the periphery of the
art world but as in the u.s. that is who
has the right to speak on behalf of who
and it is our genetic code that allows
us is the perception that we have within
society is our personal narrative and
history and so someone who is white
British no I mean still like it to be a
woman today no but the interesting thing
is that we are becoming so aware but who
has the right to speak on behalf of who
it is true that we are all interested in
this rewriting of history and the
colonizing knowledge but my question to
you is how difficult and how easy it is
to give someone the right to speak on
behalf of others when in fact ultimately
as architects we are always building on
behalf of those ones who are not sitting
at the decision-making table that in
fact we're always building for those
ones who never hire us so could you talk
about it in the art yeah I mean I think
it's a that that question who is
speaking on behalf of whom the where the
authority lies will I'm sure shape much
of what happens to me in the next few
years
you know that idea of the kind of
broadcast model the BBC museums who knew
everything held history and collections
in trust is disappearing but I do I do
think there is still a really important
space for research the scholarship and
expertise but it has to be it has to be
shared and it has to be used lightly and
you know one of the projects that we've
been doing the potatoes I suppose it
could call it decolonizing our language
so we don't have heavily text you know
overly complex specialist language as
the language of first encounter you can
find it but it's not going to put you
off at the first encounter and of course
we have this space port 80
we have our staff networks and they all
feel empowered to be part of the
discussion so there is a negotiation but
a lot of the next few years will be
taken up in talking so it'll be the
quality of the discussion the trust
that's kind of the safeness of the place
in which it takes place and
institutionally finding a way of
continuing to you know support all those
things that we love about the art world
and yet make it a space for everybody to
have a voice I mean I sometimes Weebly
when I became the director take mod and
I described the museum as a university
with a playground attached to it and I
sort of still it's a bit naff I know but
I sort of still think that's that's
possible that it should be a place where
you could journey from you could begin
with a swing and you could end up in
deep research and not find that a
problem I mean that's a fantastic way to
end maybe just an observation Tania
Bruguera is someone that I honestly
would have never ever imagined to have
been at the table because I know how
powerful and Dodgers her work is and I
think that's just an example about
things that these days are obvious for
us to think about we will draw some of
the artists that you brought at the tape
that but at that time were as dangerous
if you want unless in a certain way as
as important will be for the history of
ideas of all time so it is a real
pleasure to have you here and thank you
so much for taking the challenge to be
in this place and to answer to some
questions that architects we have about
all work but ultimately that all world
so thank you and see everyone else
upstairs for a reception thanking her
for these like to thank you
you
