well you know it's always a pleasure to
have PhDs finishing because you know
very often it feels like it's going on
forever and so it we've been quite good
this year because we've had five
completions and it's even better that
three of those are here today with us
they'd started to give presentations of
at least two hours of you prepared and
started our tour idea and its topic
plastic and then followed by Neha Sabha
on a topic of walkability in Dubai and
then finishing with monster ricardo
evolved and his historiography
right
so I started the research my name is
authority yeah I started I started there
were 13 2011 seven years already so I'll
try to do the best I can to summarize
the content of the research the process
and the document which is going to be
beautiful tasks so I think is important
to say how the whole thing started and
why the word some changes a little but
so just to clarify also have my head the
research had I started with the
obsession of the world and the reality
was kind of a resultant of continued
process so I was kind of intoxicated by
this book Alfred North Whitehead
president reality and which led an
untidy of the world and the architect as
kind of the warden and the architect a
second as I said as a condom
administrator and of the border so that
kind of led me to a lot of very abstract
text so I read from the loose - why here
- Heidegger and
I was bouncing around my time children
my research bouncing around for the
first year at least and things were
quite fuzzy until what can happen which
is that for things aligned while I was
reading which is I think quite
unorthodox for the interesting way of
researching the first one was well
actually the first women says well my
the solution with the relationship that
architecture was trying to establish
with urbanization I was I came from a
very geometrical background I did the
early 2007 work with a very famous
office that rely on his conversation to
the city on geometry and the narrative
of fluidity and continuity on songs as I
said there was a convent disappointment
doesn't comment with what this kind of
practice was giving to the to the to the
process of urbanization he was quite
trying this quite really unappealing to
me so as the first one the second thing
was a fair number Brunel I came to him
by accident literally and sorry
yes Fernando who and his concept of
material civilization which came really
appealed to me and the idea that history
can be in order to fully understand the
decision you have to look into micro
material interactions to kind of make a
complete map of the destiny for the
course of civilization and he runs into
several examples that have direct impact
into what we know today as urbanization
and he is very interesting series and or
essays sections on Paris and sewage
where the sewage work in Paris how
people move water around and science of
course it took a very abstract kind of a
to the situation to a very pragmatic
very palpable and material condition I
don't think that was also lied to these
sort of three points was my obsession
with plastic and this is just literally
absolutely as the Pingala clink plastic
in this case exactly that kind of just
an obsession and fascination is not as
well is what the fascination and an
obsession with plastic that it was
nothing but that
but address text mythologies where he
speaks about plastic how this is plastic
and as at the ever-ending kind of
continuous profits process of
materialization that the substance of a
10000 use that will eventually change
the way we relate to our material
reality so these four things align and
kind of cape works in a way to this
title plastic the use of everyday
materials and as a scientist understands
of contemporary brain change
urbanization to something by fire
urbanization has long been related to
plastic as shown in this very clear coin
of the transatlantic cable the late
American America 1866 was completed
which further coating actually just very
kind of sweet material latex and rather
large can't communicate the word
fundamental for this treasure to be
successful and this had a massive impact
in things like the worried a the
relationship that England and America
had in the world China in science in
urban process of course the research not
exactly about it's also this image of
New York and how coating again changed
were encouraged to New York as a
financial center was fundamental as much
as elevator of Dario and this later
today Coty in cable service was
fundamental
not discovering a fundamental device to
enable communication and kind of
activate increase the density and
intensity and your safety changing the
the physicality of the city
substantially the only thing that has
also changed substantially the the
concept that the confirmation of urban
environments is the pneumatic technology
invented by the lava it's hard to
understand how could we see this kind of
urban configuration of the pneumatic
technologies and the freeway probably
would be very different without
animatics but the research was not so
much about that but was there everyday
kind of plastic environments and it has
this was kind of the very familiar it
was it was it was trying to effective
very familiar physical Sarandon has
shown in this 1955 Life magazine culvert
where everything was going to be this
possible and wonderful this also allows
or economy so in a way kind of classic
classic ever see Jersey was in the very
how classic really changed her intimate
relation to our material reality we're
absolutely surrounded by plastic to the
point that eventually some people argue
that our realities were very fast it's
us it's more thing and it's more mobile
than it was before because of the amount
of material and also its implication in
the global economy plastic has
absolutely is absolutely fundamental to
the global economy from top rotation
through packaging to medical equipment
clothes construction industry
infrastructure science so the second
chapter and this is definitely not
linear it's really goes into so what is
plastic what's actually when we say
classic what are we talking about
so the second chapter is a kind of
historical review in a way of what it's
blasted from the material perspective
but also from the cultural perspective
so plastic kinda started a cinematic
follow the Falcone
as you know backlight with fresh juices
and as a supplement for ivory for the
for the users of billiard balls all the
way to sign a symbol of democracy and
design
we're 350,000 people and the shop to
disease chair actually of course is a
speculative number because there's no
way to know
350,000 people sure walk on that portal
able to see the point chair like North
sing away plastic kind of enable this
became some sort of symbol of democracy
for reason and of course design because
all plastic objects that we know are
desire as well just like and plastic as
also plastic as an experience in this
case the Monsanto founded absolutely
everything or almost everything is made
out of plastic and also at this point
Placid the kingdom for the first time an
architectural project were also the
leads of destruction the its attractive
also very evident at this point house of
plastic as as a vanguard in architecture
and as I said kind of people talking
plastic about like as evil as if it was
the new concrete because the limits of
this material to fire them
anyways at the heart of music in new
ways of new ways of thinking about
architecture design of course became
that all the way to bankruptcy of a way
of life and the way we need different
plastic pollution and sickness and
environmental disaster and so on so in a
way I guess the conclusion that the
first kind is diving in the plastic
confusion with the plastic is much more
than material and was more much more
than civilian first because this roughly
60,000 types of plastic in the market
which makes it very ambiguous time
already but also because that amount to
material as I said before going back to
our trace text and technologies of
plastic which comes from a big plastic
code has changed the way we see our
physical reality as something that is
constantly morphing
Deacon's drastically we see
[Applause]
so out of sixty thousand types of
plastic occurring in the market I was
really really concerned more about the
actual classical my intention was PT and
one of the reason is because this is
really accessible you can see it
everywhere PTZ material is this red
material from which we make plastic for
another reason is because Mexico to the
point that coca-cola has permeated the
political just like other big brands
have created the political sphere seen
in the u.s. in Mexico has happened the
coca-cola has permeated in a way the
political scene to the point that in
2000 year 2000 Mexicans Mexicans elected
CEO of coca-cola as president so you can
imagine
and the case of corruptions for instance
in football and other things that are
surrounding coca-cola absolutely
gigantic so I mean just to kind of do
the morning more the kind of mindset of
the volume we're talking about will be
that we will feel the Wembley Stadium
every every day of plastic bottles so
that was kind of the reason where I
started at the time the other kind of
fun interesting like that I found the
plastic is that it is estimated that for
every week we produce in mexico's
reproduce a plastic bottles the coolest
thing here is that of course this is not
just producing mexican isn't the
national network that links China the
u.s. Atlanta and she's different parts
of Mexico to produce this border so the
first question was to which extent
I mean phe because of the volume which
marked her physically is part of the
physical environment doesn't matter this
movie but so the question of trying to
race is to which friend is also
considered part of the process of
urbanization the the metabolism of the
material that comes into the city leaves
the city and in a way has also that that
market has also conform the city we
cannot ignore it is really dark and the
other question is what what's the role
of architecture you know this so without
one we did the first exercise in 2012
where we collected 30,000 plastic
bottles and with the idea to breach
associate from a social network to a
material installation kind of linkage to
the situation and recollect the turtles
it was supposed to make an installation
in a center project of the local
university in my company I was telling
to Mexico so we have the idea was to
hang these objects from from a cabinet
that's over
- kind of an useless space as a kind of
awareness situation when we were we were
going to expose 30,000 plastic bottles
these 30,000 plastic bottles because we
scarred that you need 30,000 breaks -
more or less to build three-bedroom
house in Mexico so the idea was to kind
of replace the material different
circumstances to kind of make the point
and raise awareness about about the
situation now the idea was not just to
put the material there but to make an
inspection to use the spatial properties
of the of the room and the special
theory of the of the city to kind of
make certain division architectural part
this is more or less the output also
that the modules were very low-tech
were thoughtless variable in order to
kind of allow for people to collaborate
of course this was done without money
and there is a lot of loving and a lot
of conversations and a lot of meetings
trying to convince the people to let us
visit the space because it was locked
all the way to getting the raw material
put in the material in the right space
Romina sells kind of fun transporting
the material and keeping the material
safe which is Jose so after after this
so this collection is quite successful
250 people show up the first day it's a
peculiar good event there was beautiful
presentation and then questions and and
we kind of notice that there was a lot
of lack of awareness to which extent
this material was is part of our city's
very weak so it was a successful model
and and then after that I thought it was
a successful process and after that I
went to basically to start chapter 3 in
my thesis I went back to country to
really try to trace back the use of the
material as a motor and design in
architectural practices so I dig deep
into from the through the other way too
try to trace why an architectural design
has never really considered the material
which is extrinsic Agra main force of
course from from the trivial to liniment
and school design all the way to the
courtesy suggesting that architecture is
preparation of the mind this kind of
discouraging some Neoplatonic threads
name and realize that the architectural
realizes quiet is that the inertia of
architectural design practice is that
the materials are elevated to the air
in other words in simple words language
you have an idea we projected right and
then you materialize the powerhouse is
interesting exception to find the way
and the reason why that kind of and that
kind of led where we I think we are is
that kind of led to strong desire of the
Disciplinary practice of architectural
design to be
around the conceptual of the formal
which goes back to my crisis with the
geometrical normal so what about the
material in a way the question I was
trying to force of course is a Thomson
thousands probably of exceptions but the
neurosis which is talking about the
generic inertia of this don't thing I
discovered in the process of this is
that the design process I got obsessed
about design methodology the design
processes and this kind of concern
Eicher of imagines project leader
building it the first part of the design
process is always an internal individual
process consists mentally that that gets
communicated that time right so this
this project part net don't in 2014 in
the part of the Cultural Center wanted
challenged to a certain degree that or
explore the boundaries of that asked for
a collecting some sort of collective
tectonic system in which again very
simple material was she's very familiar
material recycled from the bottles of
knew if it was meant to be used to think
of collective some sort of collective
different systems or sort of collective
design system what is not
signed by the collective assisting to
which extend the collective can design
or determine the form of the shape of
the grow the process of growth of the
thing this is just a very simple body
which in which for 15 days people attach
backs and literally grew without the
only purpose of this was to actually put
an object to kind of make an event out
of that there's a very basic thing on of
put it backs into something we do you
intend to do things like of course
people start playing the backs
we're in French Way but her select
reason the governor of the city was
invited he requested a black plastic bag
which of kindness different shapes is
that his foot printed to installation
which was quite funny but at the same
time quite telling of what's happened
the last installation which was which is
called classic spatial machine which has
purpose of a pretentious name was kind
of looking into the possibility of
using our kind of bridge between the
term classical of continuum manipulation
or material continuum of manipulation
and the and programmatic system for a
prior specialist problem meant to be
program in different ways so we design a
very again a very simple this is a this
is a plastic pipe was recycled from
these pellets nothing didn't repay this
different recycling process because he
was running in different cities which
was meant to be adjustable like this
there's basically adjust to go up and
down this is a bit of the result and
what happened here although it didn't
work exactly as we planned it but what
happened here is that people could
manipulate the ceiling close it and open
it and it hosts a paper it hosts concert
a fashion show and a Design Festival and
with different configurations this is
you can see some of this this is this is
a this is a oh sorry anarchic City this
is art exhibition this is accessible so
this basically when when that enough is
basically around the ring and there was
also this thing and then and they were
back here to Google after now so
there are other particles that was quite
interesting than the research that a lot
of material was generated a lot of
sketches always trying to kind of abuse
material exploration as a kind of the
first the first part of of generating an
idea intubation or an intervention and I
did I don't know Mary hundreds are not
here of sketching some exercise that
eventually died the balloons with this
wonderful diamonds and but I personally
myself find it quite filament
interesting starting from directly from
the material without having to you and
then eventually the ideas kind of start
merging and then with the material start
twenty next which is
in the research they'll interesting part
that happened in the research is that
and this - the last line so is that some
of these spaces were literally locked
from public access and this had a branch
of different interventions that happen
in my city and cement the righteousness
one that in a way the installations I
did serve as a precedent also to kind of
make interventions in these places to
ask for race or just express it from a
bunch of different things so in a way I
guess it's kind of interesting part of
the research or a consequence of the
research is kind of in a bit of a quasi
architectural space - within its
relation to the kind of lubricated quasi
architectural space and its relation to
the urban environment
lots of questions but I'm not quite sure
you wanted to leave the questions to the
end is that or shall we go shall we
start now yeah yes one needed question I
had for you was about these at the end
the conclusion and the contribution to
knowledge I mean in which way do you
think this investigation is so that's
two that's two two words in which I
think them the research contributes to
knowledge one this is light this is this
is this is probably local knowledge if
you want because the first developer in
the local community and the way they use
the space so I think that sense kind of
the intervention reactivated urban
activity in space Bala :
that's one and the other one is I think
which is also successfully the use of
architecture as a tool aside as a
didactic tool to raise awareness about
different issues in this case the
relationship between plastic and the
confirmation of an environment or our
physical mark another that is being used
in Mexico for for building attention and
so there was the design of potential
investigation in front of you to to
address very quickly but but you seem to
leave it on the outside maybe for good
reason the the notion of the border with
which you started and then somehow
abandoned or became is important but
ultimately I see it everywhere because
everything that we put in there is
actually a border yeah this is that I
dropped it because at the level that I
was starting to tackle the border as a
provenance really abstracting and then I
really I just realized I mean why I
really have to
and the background to kind of deal with
that problem at the consumption level is
too bad for her to be but definitely the
border is kind of assumed that I know
he's a very talented designer I mean I
remember this thing aportfolio of yours
maybe seven years ago and it was a WoW
and somehow from that very glamorous
design you went to be to the other
extreme in a way and then these things
at the same time by the way I didn't do
those things some of those things that
you showed us to change some of those
things that you showed bring back some
some of that comer I think it's quite
interesting that front very calmly very
architectural you went to the to the
rubbish so to speak and the rubbish then
was made into being something
architectural anyway other people might
criticize you that the the awareness of
the material that is given does not in
any way address the problems of that the
material creates I think I think so
basically what I said is that the
distillation had a very specific target
the first one was awareness so this
first installation the idea was to raise
awareness about the problem in a special
way so you're in space people have you
seen these things have you seen the
amount of can use this is just you know
this is just a tiny bit of what we
continue the second one was about
participation and kind of being able to
behave any way of generating form and
collaborative tectonic system and the
third one was about a special
reconfiguration and programmatic clothes
so in a way now it didn't continue as
glamorous on my previous portfolio
because the these are actually
one-to-one installation so 90% of their
furries you don't see there because
there's a lot of human conversation
which by the way I don't think is
properly documented because within that
negotiation isn't this a lot of richness
I think I mean I have a final question
which is about the process of doing the
PhD and and your own particular approach
which which in a way is quite short I
would say because you know Your Honor
permission
and honors the discussion and
explanation started in 2011 and then a
year later perhaps not that clear which
rights calling so that there seems to
have been a lack of focus initially or I
don't know lack of clarity in something
which way to go or how to or how to go
yeah I think no I think not just
initially at the end as well we are said
that and I was discussed extensively
during my Viper I think yes and I'm
trying to close the gap because I'm very
aware that I left a lot of doors open
and think especially things like
organization and they're all plastic in
within the structured whatever but I
think especially that first year allow
me to get more certainty in the long run
yeah I know the document can be much
better but that dear father allow me to
kind of completely losing my head
so imagine inside his work that will
continue I think the change of the title
from process city architectural
condition to plastic I was arguing that
changed the title because the order of
the process they became life kind of
thing which I'm quite comfortable with
and plastic was just took my first break
committing the whole process for
understanding
bursting of the method and because it is
amazing my design
and we simply week
very excessively over the other seven
six years
we decided to move whatever
understanding
and
open up the question
and basically
that manipulations and treatments of
material so you run away it was like
going from the macro scale to the micro
students tried to open a portal to the
sports segment red circle the growth
issues for the border of the city or
company quite ambitious
that was something we also said that
this country was going on in the process
of the upper 2os also a process of
thinking about what the PhD by designed
this might be and my 12 in a different
way I was going to say that the
and I don't like it sounds like the
consolation but in all such cases where
the the maturity of the topic takes a
while and know how to involves in doing
almost everything there imagines that
there is a strong gain I mean it makes
it stronger and and and it makes you
resolve stronger also in terms of either
how to communicate or how to go back the
next times it's highly commendable that
you took it upon yourself to to give it
only time all of course you were doing
other things as well
whose central
and so it's really you know what
solution should be invested in sessions
and similar sense plasticity has been
discussed
many many times I mean
now does that kind of does I think you
think extract from
in us my city is what seems to that
characterized plastic achievements and
city very rapid that actually Sun the
Sun producing protection through much of
Sanitation watery habitats where she do
that
space has
sass and then Jake's way the house
you know that's one example
using a house it's interesting drops you
know ways not because this way
electricity stops if you see there
actually has an enormous conflict
between my form of evolution
then each time the firehouse
which is that it's registration of the
negative face right never lacked
something there seems to spit in
that raises the question very astute Oh
I mean isn't the more active of these
plastic reticence to do to the presence
brush in which bonding become skilled an
early example
that's I have a whole chapter on that
and it is true to a certain extent but
this is a big narrative when well first
the first time
plastico was used was for the forming
wound I mean without a mole or for
changing shape of a stone in ancient
Greek
so the malleability of wood was the
first thing that was addressed but
you're right in plastic it's always more
or has a kind of a negative that forms
the thing kind of with like in examples
of the concrete house I think that's
kind of what's happening here where you
have a recognizable object that is a
ceiling and then you kind of establish a
very strange relation to it now the
traditional narrative of of the ways of
production in the first chapter of my my
pages about that is at least in
architecture dominated by the night
domotics narrative and it's really about
the macroeconomic situation which is
produced but if you go into them which
is the kind of department point to
address if you go into the micro scale
as marina were saying to the molecular
design of plastic you realize that this
thing was designed not from a scientific
point of view but for a marketing point
of view and then becomes from is the
sign from from the more level to have a
macro
impact and the companies like DuPont and
especially point change in a global
market from the Nano design which I
think this is where the micro Klein has
takes a difference and I've seen
because
[Applause]
[Music]
the TV is if you buy one beginners
it's just this is very spacious I mean
it's all the question that can be
answered I think but it's ever where F
is and from the perspective of my work
which removes valid critique of the
architectural projects talk about it
represent its structural beauty that
immediately leaps out with your
presentation of me kind of like to know
your thoughts on it
and obviously the way to manipulate
these terms of plastic into
an aesthetic object a new presents it's
a sensation of the object as a way of
like putting it on the table and making
is the thing that people would realize
that they have to do but at same time
we're doing that too it seems to me that
automatically from the gesture or
sanitizing it you're kind of fetishizing
the object in itself it is current
condition so I mean the way in which is
transformed ravishing Beauty very
classical sense it it seems to me like
it would appeal to co-present Mexico
very much in the sense the more talented
the designer the worse the situation
becomes the colleague obviously
brilliant
might be making a big mess of things the
co-ceo president of mexico funding your
project and signing beautiful plastic is
vital to thriving I think I think you're
coming as another form right which is
using Beauty yourself in a perverted way
to kind of get into that world because
it's actually what beauty is actually
getting to the boy and beauty becomes
kind of an imperial to see the horrors
of this in a way I think yes I think it
has another fall and this is how this is
a lesbian architects face for a long
time no see
usually that the estate gesture more
operative to raise awareness for classic
you just really try the rubbish occupy
the entire courtyard yeah it will
exfoliate the back you mean aesthetic
that would function better for raising
awareness will of course it doesn't
function us understand the problem is an
architect
the problem is yes I believe I found
this in a piece of fire is not trying to
be a piece of pie
and it's not trying to make any saving
it's time to use beauty as a tool to
negotiate these institutions the people
there because it's a chain problem you
need lots of bottles no totally why it's
just that I think any kind of any other
comments or questions
okay thank you dr. rampion well it's
coming
I'm just getting used to it I think you
will be dr. Arturo yes
which doesn't sound as good
you know do you think we hit our jogging
shoes on no no
[Music]
okay
I'm Neha and I've started my PhD on the
academic year 2013-2014 and I've
submitted on 2017 a few months back my
topic was walk
by improving from the comfort and my
supervisors are CMOS and voila
my topic investigated the potentials of
improving walkability in Dubai in such a
challenging hot climate so
the case studies that were selected for
investigations were communities urban
communities that have different
facilities so the study focused on
routes between the front facilities
people walking through their daily
journeys to metro stations on their
daily journeys to work on their shopping
to the supermarket's to the mosque and
so on
there have been a dominant lack of urban
design in terms of shading ventilation
that prohibits people from walking extra
at the longer time of the year during
some during the very short period of the
year you can see people walking around
in urban communities but during other
times those pathways were totally
deserted
all the solutions and the attempts that
were done focused on providing more air
conditioned spaces as the only solutions
either there were in golf cars or
providing continuous air conditioned
tunnels covering up a whole urban areas
with glass stones in order to be able to
control the environment before I jump
into what I did I would just provide a
brief summary about the climate of Dubai
the climate of Dubai is a hot climate
with high humidity levels it has been
divided into three climatic periods a
Maya's period when the weather is
pleasant a warm period which is a very
short period on April and in November
and a very hot period between May and
October
those climatic periods has helped this
study focused on which areas can we
improve the walkability period and how
can the urban design contribute to
cooler spaces so the methodology
investigated the relation between the
outdoor spaces pedestrians and the
market requirement aiming to improve the
impact of the market comment on
pedestrians thermal comfort so those
relations were investigated into two
main categories the environmental
monitoring and the social surveys social
surveys focused on interviews and
thermal walks while the environmental
monitoring had more computer simulations
and data logging accordingly the
research questions were structured
trying to tackle the main problems in
each category so the main idea of the
main scope of the research questions was
to check if some of the Universal
indices would be if we would be able to
use it in such climate and how long
would be people be able to tolerate
walking outdoors pedestrians and what
are the influence of the different
design morphologies of the built
environment at different times of the
day and different times of the year I
would start with the social surveys
which was the interviews interviews were
conducted over a period of a year and
total of 300 interviews were done with a
set of prepared questions people were
stopped along their journeys to work in
the two urban communities and to the
mosque to school at different times of
the day morning midday and afternoon the
journeys that were ident the journeys
were cut into different pieces based on
the shading levels and the morphology
the morphological attributes of the
spaces in order to try to understand the
sequence of spaces that pedestrians go
to from the start of the journey till
the end of the journey people were asked
about to vote based on
the ashtray scale for their thermal
sensation and their comfort levels and
many other information were gathered
such as if they owned cars their
clothings were recorded in accordance
with environmental map and monitoring
and spot measurements were measured and
documented at the same time the data was
analyzed and the findings revealed that
between 20 and 27 degrees people were
comfortable which was a warder which is
lower the range compared to their
thermal sensation which was their
thermal neutrality the findings also
were correlated with the pet and the am
pet which is the modified version of the
index physical equivalent temperature in
order to calibrate the use of such in
this index in in the climate of the bath
and it revealed a steady discrepancy and
the reason for that was revealed because
people in Dubai have have been wearing
higher clothing levels compared to other
places where the the scale of the pet
index was done
a direct correlation between the
increase in air temperature and the
thermal sensation was revealed and also
the frequents of people walking to those
utilitarian routes revealed a strong
potential where which needs a quite
improvement and then the thermal walks
was also done in order to analyze the
sequence of spaces that people go
through rather than investigating the
thermal sensation and the thermal
comfort folks at certain spaces so a
structured walks for 20 minutes were
done with six subjects six volunteers
over a period of a year to cover the
three climatic periods people stayed in
an indoor environment for some time to
reset their body temperature and then
had to walk in a sunny space for 15
minutes and then moved to a shaded space
with an induced end of 3.2 meters per
second and then had to move again to the
sunny space this the aim of this thermal
walk was to be able to identify the
thermal transition the influence of
thermal transition on their comfort and
sensation
throughout the three climatic periods
the fluctuation of thermal sensation and
thermal comfort votes were different and
however the warm period and the month
period were very similar to each other
in terms of thermal comfort yet not in
terms of thermal sensation so as the
weather got warmer people felt their
thermal sensation was highly influenced
yet they were still able to walk so they
had a higher tolerance however in the in
the hot period this tolerance was
reduced dramatically
moving to the data logging which was the
I will I will find provide the wrapping
up between the conclusions of those
different methodologies at the end the
data logging which does the
environmental monitoring methodology use
a data logging station with which
measures air temperature the global
temperature and the relative humidity
was constructed and was put in the four
different spaces with different
morphological characteristics each month
for five days for the whole year and the
data was analyzed in relevance to the
climatic periods again in the hot period
which is the hottest period of the year
this is the the differences between the
different spaces did not record much of
a difference because as people
disappeared from these spaces anyways so
it was too hot for any improvements yet
slight discrepancies can be seen
compared to the other periods yet those
discrepancies were between 2 degrees and
2.9 degrees Celsius at the different
times of the day however during the warm
period the warmest the warmest face was
this place that had no shade that had
the lack of shade yet the space had the
most or the highest wind a ventilation
throughout the whole day
the
these pennies for the trees which was
shaded yet did not record the coolest
space during the warm period while the
space with a building shape was more
influential on reducing the air
temperature so shade was most effective
during mid-day
during the marked period actually the
space for the trees was contributed even
to warm our spaces rather than this face
that had no shade during mid-day and the
afternoon yet the space weather with a
canopy which had continuous shade
throughout the whole day was the coolest
space throughout that three timings of
the day this was compared again to the
globe temperature to understand the
influence of the radiations compared to
the air temperature which is not the
only influential parameter on thermal
comfort which will be assessed later the
microclimate of simulations will run
through an limit as well a patch of the
JLT area was
ecology of the areolas model and
simulated which included the journeys
from the mosque to the mosque and
between the metro station and the office
buildings this help analyzed the
influence of wind throughout the whole
day because the environmental monitoring
did not provide such understanding
the influence of analyzing the
microclimatic simulation on a holistic
perspective was helped a lot understand
the behavior of some spaces that were
found out through the environmental
monitoring such as that the space which
was continuously shaded throughout the
day provided the very high temperatures
during the march period as mentioned a
while ago and that was because wind
turbulence was occurring from an
adjacent area a hot spot earlier that
brought the hot breeze to the space all
the different findings from the four
methodologies were compiled together and
a proposal was found which was based on
improving comfort through shade and win
it mainly focused on the influence of
the physiological and the psychological
spelling mistake physiological and
psychological conditions of pedestrians
and that focused on face
which was the idea of local cooling and
the notion of moving to the shape after
being exposed to the Sun this this this
finding was revealed through the thermal
walks as people walked for a long time
during the Sun when they moved to the
shade even during the hot period when
there was not much of a difference
between the shaded spaces at the shaded
space and the unsaid non-traded space
they still revealed a much better boat
to step slower boat compared to just
moving just walking in the Sun and this
focuses on the idea of that continuous
shade is not necessarily the solution to
provide or encourage walkability and
improve the macro climatic conditions an
area was identified in the previous two
communities in order to be to provide
the improvement along a schematic
conceptual design
and try to understand its influence
along the three climatic periods a
comfort a comfort reducing the zone
which was the earlier a long patch of
one of the routes that was not chanted
which people always complained
during the interviews that this area was
the main reason they did not talk at
certain times of the year so this area
was designed and simulated through
implement again in order to check the
influence using the index pact which was
calibrated at the first methodology used
and this was it the design of the
conceptual strategies came from the Deaf
adding vertical planes which was
revealed through the environmental
monitoring as the best morphology to
improve or to pool the space and
therefore shading screen was provided in
accordance with the trees so different
strategies were tested generally and
three strategies were selected and
modeled to check the influence of
improvements on the concrete levels the
screens of trees alone and the shading
screens along and providing screens and
the trees also changing the albedo of
the materials
this this area this is the route where
pedestrians walked with the conflict the
client zone and as you can see the
reductions very promising reductions
were occurred at certain areas along
depending along the side of the screen
which was which provided shade and the
time of the day again that was added
that was the three methodology did that
search the three strategies the trees
the wall and the albedo this was only
for the wall and this was only adding
the trees and accordingly design
strategy could be developed further
which captures went from a higher level
and brings the town and through
an idea of the windcatcher to the face
level which provides linear shade for in
order to be able to improve pedestrians
comfort while passing through this zone
more strategies design urban design
strategies were developed there's some
of these where to try to help urban
designers to understand when landscape
designers as well to provide more
effective designs that would improve or
influence the thermal comfort levels
compared to non shaded spaces as well
and this this for example discusses the
fact that depends on the area where the
reduction of thermal comfort happened
because the the middle of the journey
depending on the duration of the journey
which was investigated through the
thermal walks again if thermal comfort
if thermal sensation people felt so hot
for some time even if improvements
happen it won't be able to reduce their
thermal sensation or pull them down and
therefore it differs again with the
patch of Sun and the length of this Sun
spaces at which part of the journey that
they occur and how frequent they offer
and accordingly those those principles
were analyzed and solutions were
suggested and that's it
and thank you
the juries can use yeah yeah that's very
interesting when the direction was
different so it was considered another
journey so basically we got the
direction is it's all based on the
sequential spaces so I have the spaces
analyzed there is a whole analysis for
those sections and just when they the
directions of people coming back and
also because when the direction changed
you can see it was very dominant that it
was at 5:00 p.m. when people walked from
the office building back to the metro
station but during the morning you don't
see any flow in the other direction so
you see all the people working from the
metro station to the office building for
example so also the time of the day
changed when the direction of
pedestrians has changed
this is kind of a continuous effort that
have technical optimization or shading
solutions that compile the possible
information
again yes because I would say that the
reason for using many methodologies is
that in order to find solutions or
actual suggestions for urban designs one
would need a very developed simulation
tool which unfortunately is not
available and there was and therefore
bridging between the different methods
with system so it compiles yes all the
brings up all the different findings
from the different methods so in terms
of walkability which was the the central
concept obviously I mean the topic would
be declared in a number of different
ways but say walkability makes it makes
one think visualize being the city
and then or not being able to do so
because the conditions are so terrible
as as you will have seen in the whole
fair fix at 45 degrees centigrade and
and that everybody disappears and and
movements of people happen from the
air-conditioning tradition car to the
air-conditioned office to the
air-conditioned house with transitions
that last seconds and therefore your Lea
natives of completely it's not it's not
so much technical optimization as to
understand what are what are the things
that are happening
[Music]
with me however you got to like because
you the videos yeah that what you've
done we didn't deserve communicating
something outside that I mean I mean one
could you know even within the
parameters that you set that so they
only obviously to just not have it
it'll kind of reduce yeah you know yeah
yeah that was actually in Sanchez who
needed an internal physiological
tradition of humans
some of the family
it's
[Applause]
- yes
whose baby boy
I do have a question
what a night
yeah I would just add the the part which
I need side them it's the influence
basically of the air condition which is
a very common culture in the Gulf region
the air condition control spaces and
that shift to the outdoor and how much
influence did it have on pedestrians
throughout the year and that temperature
difference between the indoor and
outdoor versus not being there or not
having those air conditioned spaces with
people have more tolerance to those
changes in the environment so yeah that
was part a big part of it as well
how an educated because
[Music]
it could
I would say general findings yes
but the very interesting part of it is
there are some characteristics that were
found in the urban communities in
d'Ivoire and I would say Dubai even not
kappa w which is another city in the UAE
because it has a different a wider
diversity of people and nationalities
there so this might be different because
at the same time I was able to identify
the different nationalities responses to
determine comfort the thermal sensation
we met up and those aspects made much of
a difference compared to other
nationalities so if if I would say
specific findings I wouldn't I wouldn't
say that they should be applied
elsewhere because one of the findings is
that also the other way as international
consultants in the country and in the
region bring those international or
common practices and they just provide
those or design those communities based
according and that's why they don't work
because they're based on a certain
nature and the contextual
characteristics it's not adaptation is a
key concept for thermal comfort but one
problem of Dubai is that nobody seems to
be adapted because of all you know it
has people in there for natives and
should have been adapted but they move
from air-conditioned to our conditions
so then I think at some points in the
year the only people you see outside are
immigrants immigrants from other hot
climates who in fact I have to be
outside because they wouldn't be able to
survive in the air-conditioned and
Finbar
Thank You Curtis
yeah Glennon we gain understanding about
adaptation tolerance since the ownership
of ours for example so people people who
were interviewed and they have cars but
they decided to take a metro station
park across those contractee walked
longer because they had the element of
choice and the element of choice had a
very big influence on the psychological
adaptation rather than people who were
obliged to walk but again other aspects
should be incorporated even when talking
about something specific such as the
culture of the region and say
[Music]
yes it was yeah yeah yeah so how does
that
Medina's
yes the interesting please the yes
the interesting thing about the envy man
simulation and that's why though it's
very limited in terms of other
capabilities but is that it takes into
consideration the different influences
of even planting one single tree so the
characteristics of the soil and
evaporation and all the influences of
that all of this was was incorporated as
well as different heights and types of
trees canopy but though this is not the
focus of the study but palm trees were
also exploited at a certain point
compared to wider canopy trees but
because of the high humidity levels
especially when you go further to the
hot hot air period trees do not help
because they are provided in in an area
which was measured and two of the spaces
that were measured at hack trees they
blocked the wind completely so they had
no proper wind flow so I would say that
if you were to plant trees and the pen
and the cooling from trees you would
have to give so much consideration to
the direction of when and the
accessibility of went throughout the to
the pedestrian level in that case they
actually provided a higher air
temperature low temperature and humidity
throughout the day yet not usually not
during early mornings because the Sun
disappeared and the
the spaces have time to cool and the
night flush happen and that's why you
find those those spaces during the
hostage in the hot period might not
contribute to much higher temperatures
so in this climate it's very critical to
use vegetation and water dense trees as
a mean of providing shade even as a mean
of providing cooling to the outdoor
spaces and if trees were provided so
they need to be used in accordance with
certain orientation I would say density
I would say and I think I mean how
that's good news for architects because
we want to do what you suggested and the
trees won't do it necessarily so then we
put the architecture the artifice
the architecture can move and it doesn't
[Applause]
okay and smart partisan all the claims
yeah any other questions okay okay
yes
how many of those do Mexicans drink per
year
I think I think the drinking one like
this every day for maybe I am one like
this every day so to fill the stadium
what it is a filling Wembley Stadium
every day with that exact or are
Tauruses estimated
Tauruses estimate of empty bottles
well I was debating for a while with
myself what and how I should present
this I I mean this is gonna be a longer
presentation that you expect to be
around 40 minutes of which the first 10
minutes are essentially something that
kind of is my interpretation of
something that kind of informed the last
year's it seems like it was two years
ago because it's was at the beginning of
the previous academic year the
presentation of finished PhDs at the
time it was Gabby alexandra cross Indies
and there was a kind of event in those
presentations to not just present the
thesis but we sent kind of the the
personal journey of producing the thesis
and I'm going to do that as well in the
first 10 minutes of my presentation
although I think that the terms under
which I understand my personal journey
of doing the theses are slightly
different
this friend should be longer it doesn't
have pictures I hope it's not too boring
the first 10 minutes are not
particularly academic I hope it's not
too boring possibly by virtual
insufficiently kind of insulting
I hope that did kind of the introduction
the introduction functions you prepare
this quite work yes introduction
functions as also kind of establishing
what I believe are the stakes and how
the how the theses act in the
contemporary context which I think is
the real value of producing this notion
of the journey it's the journey is an
adaptation of the thesis to context so
my method is functions as a history of
the post 1960s Western historiography of
Soviet architecture looking at its
trends and that the evolution of its
narratives in it I attempt to address
how historiography is central in
articulating ideological conditions of
the present of the historian functioning
not simply as an expression of the
reality of its vast objects nor merely
as an expression of the architectural
culture of the present in which it is
written but as an actual subject in the
definition of disciplinary ideological
frameworks it investigates how the
production of these courses on the past
effectively gives shape and consolidates
how notions external to the
architectural field are internalized
within Disciplinary thought in the
present the development of the category
of the avant-garde which is the central
category that my research goods under
observation is a paradigmatic example of
this with particular importance for the
problems surrounding architectures own
efforts at self politicization a topic
that has been increasingly under
examination at the current historical
moment in a context marked by writing
critiques of neoliberal capitalism
and by efforts to retain discipline with
public policies for social welfare and
economic development which at the moment
I think tend to aggravate on the double
issue of housing and planning I am going
to produce your condensed version of the
fundamental point of my thesis the core
of it is that what I claim to be the
established Western narrative of
architecture in socialism historically
developed within a conceptual framework
that made it a tool for the
consolidation of what me and those like
me call liberal to our ideology in
cultural studies and politics in the
capitalist West after the 60s effective
demise of class politics in Europe I am
going to address also in my introduction
how my thesis acts on the contemporary
condition when that I feel is fraught
with contradictions dangers and
potential simultaneously at the level of
architectural discourse cultural
analysis and political engagement so in
2012 as I was arriving in London the
Soviet avant-garde was kind of
everywhere
at that time when I call the ideological
role of the Western historiography of
Soviet architecture was being made quite
clear and kind of explicit from the
rigorous but ultimately non-challenging
scholarship of genre one on top of
Richard pears for the graphic nostalgia
of the most avant-garde which is the
first book over there that greeted me in
2012 when I arrived
- the self-congratulatory historical
fictions of steph environment are Hadid
also reading me here on my arrival in
2012 I could sense that skin level the
problematic nature of what I would come
to call the historiographical link which
is kind of the central concepts that
making these produces and if I'm
actually not going to talk about its
presentation it seems to propagate it if
as it as these pieces will come to state
the Soviet avant-garde had been serving
as a tool for liberal ideology of
cultural politics against left class
politics then in 2012 these ideological
framework was dominant to the point
where each nation school play can free
and blues with material in ways that
seem to be so obviously obscene the
thing would kind of downright funny
of course as work on disease progressed
I realized that his amusing perversion
was structural to the entirety of the
historical development of the whole
historiography particularly in the
London of the 1970s and especially in
this very school which I didn't know
when I came here it's kind of a place
which ideological works and functions I
was also getting to know at the time I
mean the amusement that I fell in 2012
was over four years of the research work
extended to the general bodied whole
body of serious scholarly work on the
topic as well and work often done by
very knowledgeable authors whose
competence as historians I cannot begin
to approach
if I could like kind of started finding
the whole thing kind of funny it could
be seen as one of the products of having
produced the work the series creative of
ideology seems to almost inevitably
produce as a byproduct a certain degree
of kind of cynical amusement probably
since it's very inception like a picture
marks smirking as you relativity mayor
of Winnie polio and in recent years
Savage injects seems to have used his
own cultural brand or critique of
ideology with the tradition of stand-up
comedy at the same time being myself
kind of a red card very militant
political activists see the old style
which is the file that still kind of
operated in my country as well as being
at the same time a petty book for
intellectual I cannot help but feel
together with the cynical amusement the
significant sense of historical tragedy
in the main marks certainly wasn't
smirking on witnessing the events of the
Paris coin as my cynical petit bourgeois
I was delighted in the self
congratulatory first world liberal
nonsense of 2012 London my Marxist
communist nose felt at the same time the
smell of gunpowder this was felt of
course at several levels at the same
time economical political cultural
and this is your address well many in my
party have accurately predictively 2007
crash a few years in advance
the feeling of imminent economic
collapse is now more continuous and less
precise and this is of course because
the crash is ongoing and we managed such
since the central banks of the first
world decided to forego their own strict
ideology of small government and deficit
control and began printing currency in
the billions every year to hand out a
financial sector that only breathes
because it's intravenously wings to stay
dry the support that is not sustainable
becomes evidence as I realized that my
rent have gone up by 20 percent in 14
years and I learned that housing
inflation in London remained until last
year at Navarrete around 10 percent per
year since 2012 in what was undoubtedly
the biggest financial bubble in history
that he attempts to manage the worst are
known to fail these evidence and what we
instead have seen is a kind of an almost
tactile feeling of disjunction among
popular classes between an Obama effect
rhetoric of liberal progress and the
spiraling reality of austerity and
social economic collapse I could not
have foreseen in 2012 that by 2017 when
I would be finishing my thesis by a
convoluted irony or historical fight the
liberal ideology in politics would begin
imploding on the 100th anniversary of
the Soviet revolution and so today in
witness a contradictory entrenchment of
liberal ideology in political discourse
of the currently solving version of the
capitalist regime during emergencies of
class politics can subsumed under a
reactionary layer of cultural politics
in working class reaction to what I
think is a skin deep progressive
cultural politics of a liberal left that
is in voluntary thrall of the gospel of
the free market
this liberal left infected they think to
the marrow with Western factionalism
middle of the middle class privilege
doubles down on its own project of
cultural politics and increasingly
reject class politics on the very basis
that it often comes co-opted by the
cultural project of the right with the
next logical step being the explicit
hatred it often shows for the working
class the enlarged masses of the basket
of the pleura bones and in ultimate
historical irony which is great because
it makes my thesis is extremely tropical
in the present moment as a replacement
for the traditional right conservative
scapegoating of immigrants or Islam as
the external enemies on which the
subjectivity of them for the masses must
be focused on instead of oil internal
contradictions of capitals the liberal
left now resuscitates as an external
source of the problem the fabricated
style of a resurgent tyrannical
imperialistic Russia
in 2017 in this context where political
lines are redrawn and redefined we
witness at the same time a kind of a
pungent revival of this convention tale
of the Soviet avant-garde in the liberal
celebration of the cultural compass of
October if in 2012 this was amusing
against the backdrop of 2017 it became
kind of somewhere in between sad and
history that the liberal project of the
new liberal stage of capitalism has been
stretching its contradictions to the
brink of rupture has become quite
evident in the melee of London
architectural education teaching at the
AI over the period of four years has
been enough to realize that the dominant
ideology under which first world
architecture still presents its identity
to the global marketplace of ideas is
changing rapidly the perceived formalism
of it's currently dissolving version is
under increasing suspicion and both
academics and students move away from
the futuristic fanciful gestures of
liberal artistic freedom and instead
emerged new versions of the project
which is the second central category
into observation and these new versions
are grounded on these courses of social
engagement the over there dies somewhat
racially
and kind of leftovers of the PASOK
system like patchouli sensing he is
about to be swept away into the crash
thrashman of history tried to make
himself again the talk of town by
committing the structural honesty of
even before being finally committed to
the eternal oblivion of the neoliberal
been openly starting to smell anger and
against is I think challenging these
forces rise up carrying their own
dangers and ultimately powerless but
carrying also emits the false
consciousness of their projects parts of
the truth of what must be the quest for
an alternative this environment you
reintroduce what I call in the thesis
after the fury the ideology of the
planet if what had become since the 80s
nearly the project of the project
project such as that of Purgatorio rally
my second supervisor inject an
invigorating radicality of discipline
and commitment cracking splits in the
dominant aura of liberal
self-satisfaction that are
simultaneously appealing and scary to
the new generations of students and
academics his critique of liberalism and
the way he carves a path for political
engagement that cuts through the finds
of middle-class empty form or
masturbation opens the field of critique
within which my thesis itself becomes
possible
and yet bees on the same ideology of the
intrinsic political to form does not
structurally escape the established
condition of avant-garde thought I don't
think and reactionary perils of these
twenty-first our 21st century
architectural version of what marx and
engels called feudal socialism are
increasingly felt on these courses that
follow his perhaps net let's carry three
generations because less structural
challenging our pleasure of these
courses and quasi practices that emerge
riding the wave of a nostalgia for what
is mostly a neoliberal interpretation of
Keynesian politics this is the
philosophy behind last year's Pritzker
Prize in Venezuela self-proclaim you
engage generations of which the Wellness
one of the wildest Linden con artists is
a I think our very own Jack self to
redesign the formula of the liberal
interpretation of the avant-garde
attempting to weave of logic of local
intervention presented as socially aware
within the existing structures of
financial domination of basically
parasitic renting meant is capitalism
these are almost always the
refurbishment of established gentrifying
practices through the introduction of
discursive leftist cliches perhaps and
the return to the scale of the local is
basically the expression of the collapse
of the capacity of real estate investing
today when the bailouts of corporate
welfare made finance independent from
the housing credit market that these
discourses make the explicit case for
the needs to peddle the idea of socially
aware architecture to perhaps these
investors at the same time that the
champion tired formulas of grassroots
investment in self building in the face
of an accepted as fact notion of the
historical impossibility of the restate
the return of state investment or in
other words of the plan
is intrinsically linked to the character
of their projects as nothing more than
middle-class utopians where the
contemporary objective socio-economic
status of the working class is entirely
beside the point and yet even these that
I believe desperate liberal usually
media would domestic follies
in their relative indifference to the
problem of form and their emphasis on
capitalism as condition carry usefulness
in the return of the notion of
on-the-ground engagement with the
concrete conditions often in the form of
a newfound professional interest in
themes around some compounds it's
generally within this latest type of
discourse that the more apt to take
doses of Soviet avant-garde appear when
relatively widespread phenomenon that my
thesis leaves out is an interesting post
Russia right Soviet Brutalism part of a
wider revival in mainstream
architectural taste of late work well I
have not looked into these discourses
with any systematic degree it is hard
not to enjoy eating them an injection of
a revolutionary or via the Soviet
examples into the western style of art
the architecture of the era of Keynesian
planning which is entirely
understandable at a time when one with
Social Democratic promises like Jeremy
Corbyn Prince Andrei's John Macmillan
sure it's fine are so outlandish to the
mainstream liberal realm of political
possibilities as to appear revolutionary
distaste for welfare state forms however
remains in the minority compared to the
new fascination with the period of the
avant-garde and rightly so for how could
the dominant ideology of discipline
retain its vegetables or our notions of
cultural leadership were actual planning
to return not only has fast experience
showing that the actual development of
the plan
sidelines the privacy of the agency of
the cultural intellectual that is the
architect
but also the immediate emphasis on
politics and economics that is trave of
thought in client's challenges the
already contracting market position of
Architects on a very short determine
those architects still prefer over the
removal of an architectural ideology of
the plan to pursue what we describe as
projects of cultural resistance the
resistance always made in two directions
simultaneously against the neoliberal
politics of the current of capitalism
but also at the same time at least
politics to work against the realization
that political action not cultural
reaction is the operative method from
and this brings me to my thesis the
Soviet avant-garde feels today sheets
today like a glove on the hands of West
of the Western cultural intelligence you
know one way in the period of its posts
plan 1970s rinds
but in that of its contemporary form in
2017 the year of the sentence centenary
of the Russian Revolution a myriad of
exhibitions and events blitzed land and
health policy with straightforward and
especially naive versions of the
established historiographical narrative
proving that the city still at the
forefront of the liberal co-option of
the resolution we experienced and in
these events we clearly see the project
of cultural politics operating as the
liberal bourgeois alternative to class
politics through historiography in
architects in these schools and I will
produce one single example which is a
description for an event in Royal
Academy of Art in London in April last
year part of the series the rows of
series and every institution at the
Soviet avant-garde and
this bit which is my awkward
pronunciation of the Russian term is a
Russian term that encompasses daily life
domesticity and lifestyle after the
Revolution of 1917 architecture had to
create the material conditions that
would lead to the new socialist
individual and corresponding build the
term therefore carries an ambition of
utopian projects of the past and invites
us to consider how contemporary
architecture can serve or in need
facilitate a way of life for our time in
post-revolution Russian communal housing
was the primary mechanism to create a
truly collective society and eliminate
the boudoir domestic there are many who
see communal living or cool living as
the ideal solution to the housing crisis
regarding the communal lifestyle has
socially beneficial sustainable and
economically viable the idea of pulling
funds and resources for greater share
games is becoming increasingly enticing
and many are willing to give up on
privacy to achieve these benefits I
think it is very clearly here how the
the Russian concept of built is kind of
historia graphically imbued with
revolutionary potential and then it's
morphed into a form of cultural
resistance to the economic tragedy of
life liberal capitalism in its crisis
and these resistance embraces the
scarcity created by the crisis of a
profit margins and if then fetishizes
sees its social consequences presenting
overcrowding and poverty as progressive
opportunities
in an online article fashion right way I
could also say why they are progressing
opportunities that precisely through
radicalization and or through gradual
acceptance so the explicit
politicization of the Soviet avant-garde
becomes an ideological facilitator for
what I call a pseudo leftist
architectural cultural project of
neoliberal communalism and also as an
aside that is a method of achieving the
kind of metaphysical meaning in
architectural discourse it's funny kind
of functions sort of an inverse version
of HIDA carrying these course
substituted German word - meaning
relationship with a Russian one and now
several metaphysical things in clashes
it's revolutionary my thesis proposes
that this particular ideological
articulation is historically constructed
from the 60s onwards through two key
categories the two I mentioned already
the avant-garde in the project by the
project I mean the concept of free
attacks between 68 and 73 from telling a
story you have to projected appear I'm
not described in detail these arguments
I will just sum it up in a sentence
using slightly more marks its terms and
those he achieves this one a bit of a
mouthful mouthful for the fully the
project is a specifically architectural
article of intellectual etiquette or
ideology that attempts to Messianic Lee
overcome social historical
contradictions and by this means that it
attends to the project design the future
that while seemingly we evaluate these
contradictions actually reproduces the
existing social structures that enable
the continuation of a privileged
position to intellectual labor in the
capitalist general distribution of blame
by the avant-garde I have a lot more
difficult to be finding exactly what I
mean and indeed that is kind of the
point the avant-garde takes many
meanings
since the CCC still today and at the
same time it always kind of means the
same thing it presents itself as a
mostly consensual category while in fact
being incredibly open-ended in its
associations
it is simultaneously a precise
historiographical category corresponding
to a street realization in early the
interwar period and at the same time an
aesthetic meta category that goes as far
back as the category of art itself is
very clearly the food himself it carries
an implicitly political undertone and at
the same time it can be defined on a
strictly formal art historical level and
it's politics are entirely focused on
whether revolution we are fascists
depending on the historical injunction
well it is associated to an elite of
liberal profession and today completely
muted liberal aesthetic these words it
is atomized mainstream while being the
ideological vanguard of mainstream well
many would revel in these activities and
indeed the contemporary existence of the
category does precisely that a rigorous
historical ization of the category from
its identifying in these activities the
conceptual mechanisms that produce
precisely the ideology of the project
these conceptual ambiguities are
structural and foundational to the use
of category they are not simply a later
distortion of an original more rigorous
years and they are constructive and
articulated historiographical it is
through the decisions made through the
practice of history writing its
conceptual frameworks its divisions and
its very relations the wider it uses of
hype and ideological functions of the
category of the avant-garde develop and
become established in the broadest ways
and in the definition of these uses and
functions the role of the historiography
of the Soviet avant-garde is
instrumental in the specificity of its
political articulation the fetus does
not produce an account of the h3 of the
category of the avant-garde from its
sense ammonium origins to the youth of
the 20th century while such history is
interesting and already points to what
is the central conclusion of the thesis
it will be sufficient to tackle the
history of the category from the moment
it resurfaces in a static list first
after the Second World War and I say
resurfaces because the category all but
disappeared after the first world while
most people are aware of this it's never
waste to state it as explicitly as
possible the term the avant-garde is not
a term generally in use by those who are
identified the search by the current
historian
this is especially true for the Soviet
avant-garde that operates in the context
where the vanguard role was clearly
attributed to party as a political agent
not to cultural agents agents of what we
would call the avant-garde thought of
themselves as part of the specific trend
or movement they were organized around
they were supremacists constructivists
formalists etc and they fought for their
school often against others the notion
that despite their quarrels they all
have a fundamental criminality that
enables us to place them all in the same
conceptual box is never fully generated
by those agents themselves but it does
emerge slowly from the political
struggles the engagement so we see the
constructivist group aza establish an
alliance with their foundational enemies
in the remainders of the old that has no
value are generally the call formulas or
rationalist
in 1930 in the context of Ross's
political dominance in most towns
architectural circles and their push for
a unification of Altman's and their
there we even looked at the core value
we see also how this the newer group of
Opera for the proletarian art effect who
have joined the other two in 29 and a
joint declaration defending what we
would call modernist immigrants and
denouncing traditional East architecture
would refuse to join with them in 1930
and immediately after make the
constructivist their main target a clear
prioritization that matches what we now
call the avant-garde
does not really become formalized until
after the world and it comes curiously
enough as an article of Stalinist
fatigue while the younger generation of
architects who have the waiter group for
brown did establish the constructivism
of their
elders are their enemy and they need
accuse them of being just as formalist
as the younger the first group has no
against which the constructivists fault
constructivism was for them specifically
the constructivist guru not a general
umbrella term for every single
architectural trend and movement founded
before theirs but it did become an
umbrella term with the emergence of the
category of socialist realism which
isn't really formulated with too much
precision before the short period
between 46 and 48 when Soviet cultural
policies were defined by Stalin
constructivism as a meta category for
essentially over architectural and
visual arts groups from the revolution
to the early 30s if then I kind of
attorney the first form of what we call
the avant-garde and defines this
periodization but it comes from the
enemies of the avant-garde the term
itself becoming kind of a slur it
remains so during the whole hood off
period in the mid-1950s huge divided
critique of Stalinist aesthetic
guidelines does not make any real
breakthrough the category of socialist
realism and it doesn't resuscitate the
avant-garde and modernism in general it
could be it entirely continues the
condemnation of constructivism it just
thinks that both Stalinism and
constructivism are all formalism and
from now on we're gonna have the real
proper non form list architecture
and of course while we generally
perceive the survive defense as a kind
of a return of modernism this is
absolutely the opposite of what the
discourse of the Crucified debate is
there's no big turn of anything the
return of modernism or rather to return
of the other gardens on really only
really takes place in the mid 60's by
what become over the 70s and the 80s
basically the established historians of
20th century Soviet architecture in this
moment it's when hang Mohammed of
biggest historian publishes published
published always working English in the
1980s begins writing and publishing
these receivers for example the yeah
it's in the mid 1960s at the vanguard is
resuscitated in the Soviet Union
obviously funnily enough at exactly the
same time when the interesting that
objects is kind of taking place in the
West and obviously as we can imagine
it's around 1968 that real twist is
happening so I separate the Western
historiography of Soviet architecture in
two distinct phases when from the mid
1960s to the early eighties and went
from then onwards the distinction can be
defined specifically through the use of
the explicit category of the Africa the
term it is mostly absent in the first
phase and the introduction of the term
effectively defines the second France
I will not say much about the second
phase here except that it comes with a
merger of two very different bodies of
historiography that develop and define
the first phase these two bodies don't
really interact much and are mostly
defined by disciplinary areas
specifically there is one body of
Western historiography of the Soviet
avant-garde that constructs the first
accounts of the developments in the
visual arts and another one that deals
with architecture they have different
agents different concerns and above all
different ways of articulating
aesthetics and politics they both have
an early start in the turn to the 60s
and both then lay dormant after that two
leaves of 68 the visual art
historiography begins firmly in England
with the efforts of camilla grave from
5959 pond and with a few particles in
British art journals and with three
exhibitions between 59 and 62 in London
presenting the work of early Soviet
artists deeds this believes over a bit
into architecture via an architecture by
Ken Frampton only sit-ski
that's published in architectural design
based on one of Gray's articles and
because it's based off one of great
articles it doesn't really cover any
figures particularly architectural the
architectural historiography on the
other hand begins in Italy with issue
262 of Casa Bella Khatta meetha in 1962
fully dedicated to a first attempt at a
comprehensive historical ization of
Soviet architecture all the way from
1917 to the present that is 1962 follows
the following year by paternity fails
the USSR erected to 1917 1936
effectively is the first question book
on the subject
it's but it's only around 1968 that the
interesting early Soviet art in
architecture and again the term
avant-garde was not in general use
really explodes Britain between Britain
Germany France and the American East
Coast the first of a huge wave of
exhibitions of late Russian and early
soviet visual art is in berlin in 67 and
until 73 the wife does not stop starting
in 71 a similar wave of articles in art
journals in the same countries covers
the same materials and several books
compiling russian texts published by
American authors that are published by
American authors after 73 again the
visual arts historiography tends towards
the English language meanwhile the
architectural historiography remains in
Italian and French an apocalypse
landmark work begins in 67 with the
publication of video evolution and those
are on until 78 while a wave of Italian
book starts with via Luigi's negative
Duda their coastal TVs in the same year
within the architectural historiography
there are important differences between
the approaches of the Italians and that
of cop but I will not here addressed
what I would write here is what I think
is the crucial difference between the
continental historiography of early
Soviet architecture and the mostly
anglo-american historiography of the
early soviet visual arts the difference
lies in what i like to call the origin
stories of what would become known as
the avant-garde which is directly linked
to the specific meaning of the term
constructivism for each of these two
bodies of work essentially the meaning
of the term constructivism for each
other
the meaning of the term is so different
as to effectively constitute two
different constructivism both as
historiographical objects and also as
historical logic
a good example of this is the way we sit
ski is yes
and I'm choosing licit ski as an object
because they see sisters a cliche
obvious object that it's precisely
because it's a cliche object it serves
as kind of the first point of contact
with the anglo-american historiography
or visual arts for architecture
precisely through can Frampton's article
for the anglo-american visual arts
historiography who if it's key is simply
an architectural manifestation of
constructivism and through him the
historiography believes it's kind of
covering early soviet architecture from
its own visual arts point of view for
the continental architectural
historiography however early city lines
mostly outside of constructivism for he
is entirely representative of the
problems that defined the soviet
architectural debates in the late 20s
and the early thirties to understand the
complicated nature of the terms which
realize that this is key was indeed a
part of what was thought the
international constructivist movement in
the early twenties he self-identified
within the turn in the early years of
the revolution between Russia and German
speaking Europe was it was mostly
outside of Russia's functioning as a
kind of cultural ambassador in the
germanic tearing of Europe but he was
also later on a part of the
architectural group as nova the
formalist / rationalists
meeting was kind of distant
which is precisely group against which
the year architectural constructivists
organized themselves against after 26 so
he was the constructivist and an enemy
of the constructivist that's why I find
it completely useful to say that there
are two historical Soviet constructivism
one in the visual arts till the early
20s and when in architecture roughly
from twenty-five corners they don't mix
their agents are largely not the same
and maybe they are mutually incompatible
for several reasons that I won't cover
but I can sum up saying that basically
architectural constructivism forms in
1926 as a group in a large measure has a
critique on visual art students
recognize the different ways of
understanding this category which is
crucial to the definition of the
periodization has a direct relation to
this thing I call the origin story the
continent of architectural
historiography puts the genesis of what
will be later called the avant-garde
firmly as a political genesis
intrinsically connected to october
constructivism is for this continental
historian described mostly to pawza the
constructivist group the category event
being a specific movement first and
foremost even if it is generally
perceived to be the most advanced and
sort of final form of the professional
project of architectural articulating
socialist politics a project that should
be understood into three terms
with constructivism architecture would
fulfill its mission to plan the
reorganization of the built environment
to produce the new man of the future and
that is cultural project of liberation
failed is then taken as a sign of
totalitarian counter-revolution as such
the fate of constructivism as a cultural
project is intrinsically tied to the
revolutionary political project the
historiographers of architectural
constructivism especially an epochal do
not find a similar project anywhere else
nor can they they simply take what
essentially I think is a kind of a
Trotskyite role of the defeated through
revolutionary that was betrayed when
there were development of real events
according to this constructivism must
carry the meaning of this specific
political dimension and cannot function
as an umbrella term the one they use for
the purpose is a very neutral term to
just call it the twenties the
anglo-american visual arts
historiography exists in complete
contrast to this it has a much more
formal definition of the objective
studies extending its genealogy into the
late 19th century and the revolution is
something that seems to mostly just kind
of happen to it and with which she ends
up dealing with and wading through
ultimately failing naturally the
twenties is not their umbrella term for
the period it focuses on lines mostly
before the start of that decade while
this historiography lacks such a term
initially for great simply the Russian
experiment
constructivism eventually begins to
serve that role in more or less the same
way it did in the Soviet debate after
the 40s
however this historiography because it
has a more formal art historical and
less political understanding of its
historical object also has less
precision with it with in regards to
realization and as some authors
presented as a tradition of formal
innovation coming from the last decades
of the 19th century others like Steven
ban will present a tradition of
constructivism that extends away from
revolutionary in Russia and comes to
post Second World War
West this stretching of the
historiographical category into the
present of the historian should be
looked at as a classic cave of what the
food equals operative criticism and it
is achieved precisely by the
politicizing categorical connotations
well I do think that the two approaches
have married side she's here gonna point
out that the arguable American role here
is to essentially politicize the objects
which is kind of funny as a snipe
leftist called a Continental leftist
myself this is kind of the specialty of
anglo-american historiography of
basically everything
the this problem of the origin stories
and categorical associations brings me
to what I think are the full
consequences of the second
historiographical failures into the
final point with this presentation I
stated before how the second phase comes
in the early 80s with the merger of the
two different historiographical bodies
that developed during the first phase
this merger is produced very
specifically in one and led by the
architectural discipline and even more
specifically in and around this here
starting in 74 Russian constructivism
had began being introduced through
design teacher in diplomacy po9 running
at the time under years and galleys and
removals they combined references from
visual arts and architectural
historiography
they go they actually mix the value
American visual arts historiography and
the Continental architectural story of
working in design teaching before it's
ever mixed in actual historiographical
in actual history writing and eventually
starting in 78 there's a series of more
scholarly events on the subject taking
place in the AI lab I Katherine who who
then it become the grandest historian of
the Soviet avant-garde and effectively
the person who crystallizes the use of
the term and the use of the term is
crystallized in the journal
architectural design in a series of a
series of special issues completely
dedicated to the subject between 1983
and 1991
and here I'm reaching the final form of
the Western story ography of Soviet
architecture when we keep I think until
the present until under the headline of
the avant-garde it can be the wave of
extremely valuable work and empirical
research which is multiplied after the
dissolution of the USSR but this comes
at the cost of each historiographical
precision for as the two Cappy story
overseas merged the visual arts English
one and the architecture continental
they they also merge the properties of
each of the two constructivism that they
were separately dealing with the
intrinsic cultural political 'ti of the
project of constructivism as it is
understood by the Continental
architectural historians it's fused with
the relative imprecision via the
politicization of the umbrella term
constructivism of the anglo-american
historians of the visual arts such an
aura of implicit political team becomes
associated with the very definition of
the avant-garde as a new meta category
that really does not require any
specific articulation with any actual
politics
and here I'm ending my presentation by
returning to truly his critique of the
avant-garde and the project the implicit
political character carried within the
category of the avant-garde is a
character that is historia graphically
constructed in the span of a few decades
between the mid 60's and the 80s the
three points out how the
historiographical defeat of the
avant-garde comes as the material
conditions for real planning develop
architecture being revealed to be not
the subject of the plan but the object
of the plan weaving and said he does
even said the obvious point at the
subject of the plan is politics
such is the failure of the cultural
project and its architectural
manifestation in the furnace I have to
Toffoli that the very category of the
avant-garde with which he works is
itself historiographical version of the
project he attacks being effectively a
migration of the project from the field
of cultural practice to the academic
discipline of cultural history the meta
nature of the category and its
ambiguities facilitate the confusion
between political struggle and cultural
proposal or in other words it
effectively contributes to substituting
class politics with cultural power the
Soviet avant-garde is an incredibly
strong historiographical object for this
purpose and this purpose is embedded in
the development of the Western
historiography of it that I think is a
structural component of the
historiography of architect of 2010-2020
architecture in general
the project itself and which is its
final form from a cultural project aimed
at expressing and in so doing replacing
political practices it becomes in the
present a redemptive rhetoric that
imbued with revolutionary political ad
practices that would by the standards of
most of the historical agents of the
historical avant-garde of the 20s and
30s be called formalistic and therefore
reactionary the project of the
avant-garde past pregnant with the
spectrum of communism is historia
graphically brought back to redeem the
avant-garde present from the sins of its
formalism the Continental effort of
politicizing architecture value the
project and the anglo-american tradition
of depoliticizing it
each through its own historiographical
practice emerge in a new grand
narratives which effective consequence
is the D politicization of the
politicization of architecture and this
brings me back to build it's not
surprising to see a cultural
interpretation of revolutionary politics
constructed around this concept
presenting in the face of the
contemporary crisis of capitalism an
alternative of cultural criminality to
an actual political praxis of working
class organization
they're lending up really fetishizing
capitalist relations instead of
combating this is the ultimate phase of
the project that the historiography of
the avant-garde and especially the
Soviet avant-garde sherry and to our
present under the guise of radical
culture while effectively constituting a
liberal shackle on an operative
politicization of the architectural
discipline the historical problem today
is I think in the ideology of the
discipline to part of friends with
Corbusier bridge or revolution
architects tend to prefer be it the way
of life because it matches their liberal
petit bourgeois subjectivity the current
historical context however like that of
the 1930s is the militia in front of our
eyes these liberal illusions in such a
context the false hope for a non
political cultural progress that be it
brings is an objective accomplice of
reactionary politics just as the Soviet
avant-garde was historic roughly turned
into an ally of the formalism of petit
and Schumacher so his beard turned into
an ally of the neoliberal stage of
capitalism of both Clinton and Trump and
being the inevitable failure of its
ideological insistence for non political
cultural utopianism it tends to favor
trap realizing that as the center fails
and liberal capitalism is at the gates
of a fascist turn I would advocate from
the delusions of the avant-garde of an
architect of cultural progress and opted
instead for a vanguard of organized for
the world
Muenster
[Music]
[Music]
obviously it's a scholarly piece of work
but for 25 minutes or so I thought it
sounded like a polemical statement yes
rather than diseases which
I found difficult to follow and then it
did convert into a thesis which I also
find relatively difficult to follow
that's my own because I I you know my
mind works in a somewhat different way
and I
I look for answers to different silent
questions but but clearly you know as I
said clearly you have to be commended
for your knowledge and your passion and
and the fact that you can definitely put
as much as scholarly material as as as
needed but I think if if you want to be
able to address people from different
disciplines of different beliefs then I
think there is some effort that needs to
be made another example is I think it's
commendable you have
brief definitions and statements like
that but when I go into them I'm not
sure I understand like before it's a
facilitates the confusion I mean if I
see the word confusion and it as its
original Latin sense pump fusion bring
together okay I find one which could
make sense but otherwise facilitate some
confusion create confusion in other
words all of a sudden we're going to the
situation like the other God reminded me
my own topic study area of
sustainability that it can be both that
and that and the takun that that could
be the opposites
and one wonders is it then useful to
create that or should we go for one of
events and see where where its leading
that is what worries me that and then
there may be more questions opening than
being answered is that what you want
no but that's all I do my thesis is the
entire point of my disease is to
category it's like this is what you
haven't got actually is but of course
this definition of what actually is can
only be done by saying what it does and
what it does is what I've described it
hasn't it has an ideological function in
how the discipline understands itself
interval is particularly in relation to
the ambiguities of the tournament are
functional to make either be determined
Iturbi and function so then I'm
internalizing the content against for
the ambiguity clearly saddle and Cleopas
leads to very clear substantial
conclusion if these are taken by
by others students followers teachers I
mean how would they be able to use them
if depends if the architects to the
architects architects probably have a
lot of trouble using the type of
critique that I produce because it's a
critique of the architectural project
within the conditions in the terms of my
critique you can't fix an architect's
rules you can't come up with an
alternative architectural project for
the problem because the problem is the
architectural project of course I mean
we can have kind of general discussion
on how architecture deals with its own
camp projects over the twentieth century
there is there are periods in which the
project becomes kind of fades away from
the architects with discipline there is
an architecture that doesn't really have
too much project in it this is very
clear precisely in a hosted emulsified
situation today we look at the horse
right situation is I always bringing
black formulas basically bringing back
waters and doing away with classical
monumentally he's Libby and Maggie makes
sense from the our point of view because
it's like the relative liberalisation of
the Soviet Union in political terms
match is what the values we ascribe to
modernism in the avant-garde that had
been repressed and now he's being kind
of brought back or first cognitive not
being brought back the architects the
discipline is being compiled into a
crash where Khrushchev the lead
architect institutions are obliterated
canceled
in the pant the architects are made to
work in Iceland of Engineers and they're
reduced to effectively technicians the
project is destroyed the project being a
kind of one of the crucial idea washable
conditions of the avant-garde so
effectively what sous-chef does is
radical lines what Stalin had begun by
just extending the critique of
avant-garde ISM to also encompasses
Stalinist classes and then we have kind
of a long period of decades of
architecture that doesn't have much of a
project I like that I can tell
architects to do that ok we moved away
from the question and I was just
wondering something that perhaps you
might not like but I this mother
notion that there was similarity with
the discourse of Torah because in a way
both you and I but expressing some mild
criticism about you know actually doing
art or architecture of a kind from from
that and we I think we have seen similar
things happening with constructive I
mean you said it yourself in the
nineteen seventies that day you know
sharing these postcards that Leah's
Angeles and found clear wasn't I think
it was that prayer it was here yeah
Korea Korea was interested meets but it
was made the program of deep nine in the
first year career at snaps and before
that the sharing is these cards of these
objects architectural objects and then
getting inspiration from them in into
another into yet their architectural
project and one can be very critical of
that but at the same time this is a
story of architecture by artifacts you
know
so let's see more questions comments
mark you've been the silent
well he would have taken double the time
two sentences but but it would really
help because it's a very interesting
project within is like chunks of it it
is we say
xpt all these Nations official tomorrow
well I gave it to 25 minutes that you
could condense into the first 25 minutes
so that although you might you might
consider
[Music]
that's her wish my character filling us
probably Stern was imported appropriate
and stable a buyer was released then
what are we saying about what I'd like
to understand is how it was
Missy
so is there is there is
the brothers were actually running in
some
and then
and that the story released an
additional
well Mike the work I've done there was a
time in which I thought I could believe
that when I started and then I decided I
wouldn't enjoy it didn't take me too
long to understand that the cities would
not be a history or a production of an
alternative history or forever an
alternative historiography no longer
looking at the historical objects and at
the same time function as a critique of
the ideological functions of the
established history of America so what
the thesis effectively is a critique of
architectural historiography and not
it's not looking at history it was that
history only in the measure and
obviously it needs to be significantly
informed but if it looks at history only
in the measure that it allows a kind of
an operative identification of the
contradictions that exist within
dystopia in the final document
infinities I actually end up without
producing a kind of a short conclusion I
have an echo
in which I say what my intuitions that's
fallen power kind of well-informed
intuitions for what kind of a different
historiography that actually goes that
construct the writing of a new history
of what happened what really happened
then there's kind of a few leads there's
obviously I completely do away with the
category of Stalinist architecture
because it's too complex really itself
it takes twenty years and half before
before and after war things are
completely different the way in which it
relates to the avant-garde which and the
notion that we completely reject the
constructivist project for example is it
just doesn't work when you actually look
at the reality of built or that which is
built i will actually categorize what's
usually perceived as the fundamental
architectural images of socialist
realism of Stalinist architecture of
monumental projects in etcetera I would
categorize those as well as basic could
be effectively kind of a new classicist
have an guard as well in the sense that
they are also they are also a kind of a
conservative disciplinary project and
they aren't built many of them were
built and the usual argument that called
the like all of the history books of
silence architecture that talk about it
by essentially showing precisely those
images that see how different this is
from modernism and it replace it
well it didn't replace it because they
were they weren't built either and the
usual argument usual excuse for this
well it wasn't built because like the
planets were interrupted there was
didn't have the means to produce these
things yet and then after the world
market and this doesn't is not
convincing as an argument because it was
an unbelievably large amount of building
happening in 1370 hundreds of industrial
towns being built suggesting that the
priorities weren't building Soviet or
the palace of the swords and when we
look at it in this way we realize first
at a visual scale that which architects
wicked things architects look at the
scale of the building and make a history
of architecture as bill and they look at
the architectural divisions so they even
perceive the stylus architecture that's
supposed to be anti avant-garde in
Africa immediately not a vanguard sorry
we didn't haven't got a sort of layer
but reality architecture is actually the
real architecture of that winds that is
built I define it basically as being not
very architectural taking from the
avant-garde lots of technical
contributions that essentially Athens
charter modernist planning this tweaks
to have someone in the water and it
takes away much of modernist okay
[Music]
it's something you put example
the emergency bleeding
we're actually a Christian no
technological technological to narrow
the technical years solution as we
understand today just pure engineering
calculation will become a copy that
should be all that is the way
architectural no no I don't think that's
possible of your pieces did you use
quotations did you kind of pretending I
mean yes the thesis looks fat texts
texts are the objects under scrutiny and
the petition is not a validation of a
point that the thesis makes the
quotation is the object under study
see diesel denote X to conclude the arc
so that would be in a way a man
or what you saying
and she nap in a sense the whole seasons
is a map of historiography
well I actually have some that I've
produced for the course I taught these
kind of put chronographs of when these
courses happened and how they organized
the clumps and where can i address a
general question it's a pity that there
are tourists that remembering the days
that each of you mentioned our tour
started 30 2011 I think they've all said
2015 yeah and you said 2012 yeah and you
know just counting the years but it's
it's a long period it's a long period to
spend on the same topic and and it's a
long fair to say me to spend in the same
institution perhaps as a student I mean
it's longer than studying architecture
it's about the same but of course in
Portugal my mind might not expose was 16
yeah and and for some others it's four
years yeah it is within everything that
and I mean I I wanted your comment down
on that I mean how did these years feel
or is it that these years were also
filled with
things as I think was the case probably
other things which in some case
complemented and perhaps in other cases
were disruptive in the sense if you
perhaps had to work to make some living
to be able to form the phase
so for them it can it can in comment on
this because I think that's a key
question for many people are they're
embarking of continuing on the bridge
Dana Furby was tilt about four years so
I have a lot of fieldwork so it was very
difficult with flying back and forth to
divide so I think I tried to squeeze it
in less than four years with the nature
of the topic and the wide diversity I
think it was very difficult to do that
but definitely I wasn't doing anything
else I was doing only this
yeah it could have easily set out to
take more time but there's a dilemma in
the way to I'm doing a PhD like a record
time let's do it in two years and oh
because what then it's a piece of paper
that you wanted of these financial
aspects of it or becoming passionate
about the topic has already became and
then you know it's whatever time it
takes and I'm also doing other things
having children getting married you know
all this all these things that seem to
happen the whole life you know would you
say something I mean I could say that I
don't think my you might my trajectory
of my producing PhD was particularly
different than usual apart from the
usual complications of London expenses
no I mean what really interests me about
this issue of the experience of the PhD
is on how we defectively defines the
outcome not so much just like the
tribulations I have to go through to get
to the point I'll come together but how
it actually changes the prompt
and this changing of the point you're
getting at is what I said in the
beginning it's essentially an adaptation
of a kind of a proto argument you have
in the beginning to the conditions in
which you see the argument its
adaptation to context and I can say the
first year of my PhD was the problem I
had was essentially how am I going to
that the problem I'm working with to
function may be operative in the
contemporary situation in the situation
in now and of course that comes with
learning what the situation is because
it's obviously quite different then
possibly I was expecting an attack I
think the description is very accurate
okay well thank you all very much I'm
sorry that we didn't have a larger group
of audience I do hope that publications
will come out of the work I know that
neo has done a few papers I understand
you're preparing some or maybe the whole
book possibly okay so thank you very
much
