Thanks I'll get into my piece of wood
yeah this lecture is going to be
slightly different from the usual
reflective presentation and give so
normally we kind of go through her
potted history of projects but tonight
trying to mark the beginning of an
exercise in sharing of transparency and
I was starting to try and make the
knowledge and the resources that we've
developed working as a collective over
the past nine years accessible to others
who are also trying to think in
different ways about working through
architecture and it's also the first
time I've had family members and
audience so forgive me if I get really
nervous and start like burying myself in
my laptop firstly I want to talk yeah I
mean I want to talk about the crisis I
want to talk about the context in which
we're working in the context in which
some of you may be about to start
studying or will be graduating into or
some of you are already practicing
within the current culture that
generates and forms the built
environment also produces problems so
there's a stark financialization of
property which runs in parallel through
no coincidence with the increased
homelessness and serious housing need as
temporary housing providers developing
business models creating good returns
from the provision of totally
unacceptable living conditions for those
most vulnerable and society and not
least to say the building industry's
contribution to carbon emissions the
warming of the earth and the global
climate emergency all these aspects
compound inequality both within our
country and more broadly across the
world along lines that were forged by
Empire slavery and capitalism buildings
in the form of the built environment
have a kind of really powerful capacity
to make things that are in fact only
contingent or particular to cultural
historical political things feel like
natural conditions of the world beyond
our agency unaffected by our decisions
like gravity like water like weather but
it's important to remember that they're
not inevitable and that everything is
only contingent there is a really
intimate relationship between the
speculative forces that generate the
bullet
and the architectural profession and
this can be traced back to the building
of palazzo s in early 16th century Italy
started to valorize the surrounding
pieces of land which also coincided with
the rise of professionalization of
architecture so architects can be tools
and advocates for economic and political
attitudes for building and architects
give form to the nature of political
orders there are only one piece in the
puzzle but architectural thinking has
even kind of alluded to this is at least
what we like to think has a significant
role in the process of conceptualizing
the scope and legitimizing a method of
creating or changing the city it's
critical therefore that if we're to deal
with problems with the current system
architects architectural thought and
energy needs to be brought to bear on
how to change it and in order to do this
my kind of propagation tonight is that
we need to think about how the
conditions of architectural practice
itself also contributes to reproducing
these orders and so I wanted to start
with a quote from the architectural
historian Esther Choi who asked how
might we we really how might we
reorganize ourselves whilst we are
embedded within the system and thus
participate in it how a might we think
of alternative institutions more ethical
modes of conduct and unseen
opportunities to level the playing field
a little bit more in an economy and
society that privileges individualism
privacy take private citation private
site yeah thanks of the Commons that is
our social and ecological resources as
well as continuing market growth what
does it mean to come together to think
and envision a place collectively for
the first time in 40 years in this
country at least architectural workers
have started to unionize to Diwan better
working conditions and working culture
to organizers discipline just take a
stand against some of the inequality and
injustice compounded by the
architectural profession through the
development of the built environment and
the section of architectural workers are
organizing to bring change to a working
culture where there's a lot of precarity
sometimes a very intense workload which
has a huge impact on on people's lives
and certain communities more than others
so they know that
percent of architectural students are
beams black in my black and minority
ethnic but only 1.7 percent finished
entire training it's become up steps and
that's a really stunning statistic which
needs to be changed and it feels like
it's an important moment to reflect on
how things can be different not as an
intellectual exercise but as a
productive effort so sharing practical
ideas and organizational strategies to
protect a varied workforce and a
collective cooperative critical practice
that attempts to disks desegregate
ourselves from market forces and there
in terms of intrinsically driven beliefs
about the value and nature of our work
so I'm a part of assemble this is us
we're a collective who have been working
together for the past nine years through
practice that is collaborative and
mutually supportive we want to try and
start thinking about how we can share
our experience and learning how we've
organized and formalized how we've made
mistakes how we've changed and we're a
group of 18 most of whom have had some
degree of architectural education though
some of whom didn't we currently have
one qualified architect in the group and
the type of work we've been able to make
has been quite varied we're interested
in using design to make the day-to-day
richer more joyful more various to
enable a city that can accommodate a
wider variety of needs and ways of
living to enable it to be malleable and
to support ideas and meanings we haven't
yet and can't foresee we're also
concerned with how the social cultural
and economic violence injustice which
materialized produced and reproduced in
the built environment can be an
ameliorated made more visible or perhaps
that our most ambitious and optimistic
counted or even overcome what we try and
do is open up the city for people to
experience a different relationship to
their environment and through that than
to that to each other space spaces
social as well as physical ones where
people can witness their capacity to
have a formative impact on the world
around them shape it to better suit
their needs ideas and
this has led to projects dealing with
workspace play cultural production
housing manufacturing and education
exploring the gap between people living
in the city and the forces that govern
how it's made we're interested in
creating spaces where people have an
active and directive role in
collectively shaping and running their
environments making space for contact
between peoples based on cooperative
cooperation joint action and meet your
help we spend a lot of time trying to
understand how things are made that's
both in terms of manufacturing
construction but also in terms of social
structures and financial markets in
order to consider how things might be
different we attempt to read political
administrative legal and financial
systems through identifying their kind
of affective symptoms on the form of the
city our projects and our daily lives
sometimes we design construction systems
and material processes to enable ways of
building that aspire to more than the
final physical building itself to create
a social activity of learning and
experimentation often it's an open-ended
form of design physical structures that
create opportunity for continued
development generating wider ownership
seeking multiple authors over any single
one um we're interested in questioning
cultural hierarchies of value by
refocusing attention on over lips and
under acknowledged activities across a
broad range of networks and situations
so projects and work are brought
together in a variety of formats to
create new forms of cooperation to build
communities that are connected and have
agency and the kind of ongoing question
and negotiation is how this is then
realized if at all physically and
different in different forms of
architecture our practice aims to make
place places which are more plural
mediate rather than remove conflict more
up for negotiation more open and form as
well as the meaning and what I'll try to
illustrate through the process of kind
of unpacking different aspects of our
organizational development is the extent
to which the way in which we practice
architecture is in itself also so
you're space so one occupational hazards
when working in a way that try simply
embrace complexity is that you come up
against false dichotomies sometimes
explicit sometimes implied sometimes
taken for granted that if you're not a
straight forwardly commercial practice
then sometimes you're concerned somehow
your concerns are extra economic that if
you're not hierarchically organized then
you exist in an organic freeform rural
estate that to be identifiable is to be
internally coherent that to make a
typical decisions is to have a clear
sense of a future you're working towards
and none of these things that are quite
the case our practice is very
bureaucratic concerned with cash rife
with internal contradiction and conflict
most things which appear as strategy are
in fact emergent qualities of of
contingent decisions and our
administration of bureaucracy creates
conditions that in turn produce
opportunities and constraints and a kind
of awkward insight and also huge blind
spots together this has created our
working culture which makes some kind of
work possible possible even inevitable
and some kinds increasingly difficult so
over the years we've been working
together we've gone through an iterative
process of managerial financial and
cultural evolution I'm going to try and
explain a little about how an interest
in starting things from scratch as the
process of learning has kind of led us
on a really meandering path of social
and financial relations I'm gonna start
with organizational evolution when we
started working together we were a group
of leased associates friends and friends
of friends most of whom studied
architecture together some of whom were
picked up through the first project this
is not to say that we're working in
isolation we had huge social capital
which is a very formative aspect of
architectural practice we had close
relationships for mics tutors really
generous collaborative relationships
with suppliers support from some of our
employers enough architectural art for
example where we one of us was working
for them at that point were also a huge
influence on us
and and the first project where we
turned a derelict petrol station into a
cinema really defined us and our
interests as a group they're owned only
through a process of post
rationalization so after it was all over
we tried to work out what had made the
project so rewarding and successful and
started to try and formalize on that
basis and at that point we had no
hierarchy so aesthetic decisions were
based on arguments around 15's joy
accessibility and we had to work through
problems collectively we had distributed
responsibility and we supported
individuals to pursue their own
interests we'd created a kind of scrappy
DIY architecture have opened this
bringing life to a London Street using a
combination of reclaimed and industrial
materials we were on resource and our
knowledge or lack of it kind of defined
the processes we were we designed
through which we were able to reach our
goal so yeah I guess this the economy of
kind of many hands and but economy I
mean that of all sorts of social
knowledgebase not just financial and
this way of using materials are
something that we've carried with us
seeding a shared interest which holds us
together we've continued to kind of
develop this in later projects through a
focus on material provenance a real
interest in the aesthetic quality of the
handmade and kind of a champion
championing of the legibility of the
human hand in the creation of our built
environment the very kind of
constellation of design features and the
social active control okay the social
act of construction that characterized
our first projects was a reflection of
the kind of loose collective
organization we had with evenly
distributed authorship no hierarchy
meant that decisions yeah as I said
weren't made um based on taste or if
they had the in this instance they were
based around arguments around no waste
and collectivity generated a kind of
culture of energetic enthusiasm a
relationship to doing and making for its
own sake and the space physical and
financial for people to experiment and
explore working for yourself but with a
support system so cabinet studio in 2012
was our first attempt at some kind of
management structure people often worked
in residency so based in communities or
based on site running construction
projects we were very cheap men so we
could invest ourselves entirely in
projects and learn through doing and it
was okay to be really inefficient and
the management process wasn't very
effective and there was no process of
like accountability we our finances were
all form we had no understanding or
appreciation of how we are spending our
time so then in 2013 the buddy system
was introduced where all projects are
led by a pair and this means the project
management financial administration
though not Vicky camping or accounting
but deciding on the approach direction
and ultimately design is responsible for
two people and this has been the kind of
most enduring aspect of management in
the semblance it's still in place now
it's supposed to guard people against
working in isolation or getting
overwhelmed or in trouble with projects
buddies can orchestrate support from
wider teams which includes both people
inside the office and outside the
collective this allows for basically a
kind of broad set of interest setting
really different intentions on how to
pursue projects as individuals were less
able to pursue our own aesthetic and
stylistic ideas things are designed by
committee and as in a kind of
traditional architectural practices I
guess we still it appears that we have a
house style but it's produced in a very
different way so it's kind of complex
hybrid of different agendas more
energies pushing in different directions
to experiment making it making a really
rich process I think yeah so through
summer we're not really signing up for
anything other than a methodology of the
pros
of working together we take on a lot
more freedom to think about in question
design than in traditional practice
because we don't get siloed into
developing expertise on one specific
type of work or skill and we move
buddies so we ex work on different
projects and have to continue to
undertake different parts of different
projects in 2016 we started a rotational
Management Group as a way to try and cut
down on internal meeting time so we had
4m which is the management group which
is composed of a chair HR responsible
for resourcing and pastoral issues new
work who responsible for administering
and raising your opportunities and then
there there's that every three months
one or two people would swap in so you'd
end up doing kind of nine months stint
and then have a break from central
administrative responsibilities and it
was working fairly well but it did lead
to a culture of like fine grained
continual change where every individual
who came into a new role wanted to kind
of totally reinvent it and make it their
own so the most recent version of
ourselves is this which is a fixed
management group which means that
everyone's kind of assigned to different
areas so we have a group for practice
projects communications and estates
and within which you were then kind of
allocated specific responsibilities and
these are kind of set for the long term
which should allow people to build more
specific expertise play to their
strengths and interests and that's the
plan at least currently it's still very
new so we're still finding our feet and
guess it's just to say that yeah
refining the organizational structure is
still very much like a live project and
it's becoming increasingly apparent that
that would probably be an ongoing one
for as long as we continue to exist
catalyzed by people's changing life
situations their health their familial
responsibilities and different financial
pressures meetings conversations the
communication are kind of the core work
of any cooperative or collective
organization and we're no different so
we have weekly collective meetings set
for
meetings for different management groups
quarterly management meetings with QM
ins which has mainly administrative and
then every year we have a summit where
everyone goes away together and that's
meant to be less painfully
administrative but this kind of rigorous
structure has not always been the case
in fact one of the most important pieces
of work that we've undertaken as a
collective is learning how to have a
meeting how do you work on problems
collectively how do you record
information how do you set agendas how
do you speak to one another I think it's
really stunning that for most architects
and also people in general though we may
go through years of education people are
very rarely taught about the nature of
having a meeting or the dynamics of how
to hold a conversation how to facilitate
and support kind of collective
interaction and it's just totally
fundamental to being able to work in the
world so I recommend that everyone has a
go learning how to do it and things like
people who talk a lot are kind of giving
themselves permission to speak and
silence from others is a form of tacit
consent that then reinforces kind of an
unbalanced behaviour so trying to learn
that and also learning not to interrupt
each other that's a big big learning
curve so plan assemble is the weekly
meeting where we all get together and we
discuss projects and try to work
collectively it's been running since
2011 and it started as kind of
infrequent meetings in the pub or
bedrooms through a phase where it was
almost the whole day long and then
cluded a lengthy update and every
project Ling worked on it's been in the
evening for a while over dinner time to
allow members who are working in other
practices or who were studying at school
to join and was called sweeps and mops
sweeps was sort of a mentoring weekly
equites all evening presentations and
motts was monthly open presentation
they're just like totally ridiculous
acronyms like absolutely no point and it
was yeah and then it's moved to
breakfast time and then since it's
really kind of edged backwards into the
working day generally it's always been
Monday or Tuesday and now it kind of
begins there's like a administrative
update and then
into presentations like show-and-tell
and then at the end we split into
working groups focused on kind of
working through particular problems in
different projects so it's a always
meant to be you have a productive focus
where you can get different people who
wouldn't be able to otherwise engage
with the things you're trying to work
through in a project and it's really
best for generating ideas but it also
allows us to kind of critique each other
and that doesn't necessarily create time
for deeper thinking along the lines of
those critiques but it does mean that
all of us are answerable to all the
others and we can hold each other to
account and as there's no consensus
around approach we can hold each other
there's quite a fairly deep level of
questioning as encourage and this
doesn't necessarily make for easy
conversations and but it is really the
overlap and the tension between
different layers of our actions which
gives the kind of richest and most
rewarding kind of work work is not one
thing or the opposite but it's multiple
and fluid and there's no one answer has
kind of different textures and salience
needs at different times to different
people this was just illustrate or a
mild obsession with ridiculous acronyms
so administrative meeting went from mmm
which was Monday morning meeting it's a
Monday morning management meeting which
became for EM and now we've got the
worst so much as puke which basically
stands for practice estates work and
communications which is the kind of
aforementioned management groups in
terms of cash the first projects for all
event spaces so we kind of recoup costs
from the sales of tickets and
refurbishments refreshments so from the
beginning of the of working together
we've always had this idea about kind of
diverse income streams affording some
freedom to work however misguided this
is affording some freedom to work in a
different way perhaps at a different
pace or to vary the types of patronage
we can act to access our first office
open with a kind of public front so we
ran it as a pizzeria con architecture
studio for a while and it also had a
brief spell as a music
school canteen and a club and we're all
meant to be paid for the days working on
projects but in actual fact we ended up
kind of subsidizing the cafe so well you
had to make a change so we stopped the
cafe and then focus more on kind of
design project work and there's the
number and diversity of projects grew we
we started a tax system this is a buddy
system as well and where we were all
working as freelancers basically under
the name assemble and 50% of the design
fee goes to assemble in the central pot
and if you're doing a like construction
project which is like called a capital
project for those of you who a new to
the architectural world of language and
there's higher risks involved with
delivering those kinds of projects so
that involved 25% of the whole budget
going in to assemble and then when we're
doing when we're doing internal
administrative work that was set at a
kind of flat rate but basically that ran
for probably three years and we ended up
in the situation where people who were
doing other work to kind of supplement
that income so like starting a building
contractor or doing teaching were
earning actually almost twice as much as
the people who were doing the internal
administrative work so in reaction to
that we introduced ubi it's a universal
basic income which ended up not really
being a new bi at all it was intended to
create a kind of base level of income
through your higher tax but when we
actually came to vote in it as a group
we went for a hundred percent tax on
everything and so basically a meant that
every single piece of work you do that
is in any way associated to what
assemble does and then it all goes into
a central pot and we all learnt the same
flat amount so that's across all kind of
16 partners earning through the practice
and doesn't apply immediately to recent
employees but historically that income
has kind of been brought up to the same
level after a year and it's important
also to note that rental income gathered
through the management of our office
sugar house studio
has been like really critical to our
financial solvency I'm going to talk a
little bit more about sugarhouse in a
moment but just to say that workspace
development and management is something
we've been actively pursuing through new
projects in brennidon and Brixton fabric
fabric floor which is fitting here
recently opened the culture of our
practice I guess is kind of is really
defined by two main factors so there's
food and sugar house which is the
studios where offices based from the
beginning food has really played a
pivotal role in the development of our
practice and it continues to be the
thing that keeps our form of practice
sustained in the form of a kind of daily
collective lunch and whilst the some the
what the word lunch simply denotes a
break from work to eat and assemble the
kind of reproductive labor of creating
foods for one another is really
fundamental to the social nature of the
group had its origins in the building of
communal projects where lunch was really
an essential break and opportunity an
opportunity to refuel and then in the
second project it became a communal
responsibility when which each
individual was responsible for feeding
the collective on a kind of rotating
system and it's helped forge a practice
developed around the social contract
which the act of routinely feeding each
other gave a kind of familial Dement
dimension to one of distributed care and
mutual responsibility lunch is now
organized according to the rules of
complex bureaucracy so you get eight
points - for cooking you yeah - eight
points for cooking and +1 for eating so
it's quite good as it balances out so if
you don't eat for a while you're not in
the office then you're not going to just
accrue later points and and in other
projects outside the studio food has
been a critical part of their
realization of or process from who made
ice cream popcorn pick-and-mix
food cooked over an open fire at the
adventure playground to be established
in Glasgow to shared barbecues and
eating in the same place which is also
played a vital role in developing
projects within certain cultural or
community contexts
whether it be in Liverpool Croydon The
Hague or New Orleans often we consider
the food and the means of its
consumption to be designed as part of
the projects alongside strategic or
spatial concerns and at the end of lunch
in the studio we play a game which is
fives and the purpose of which has
evolved from basically trying to get
someone to do the washing up to now
finding someone to make tea and coffee
for a room
I guess that summer was from the start
of social practice and so eating
together forms a fundamental part of
that and food and fives and the kind of
culture around that break in the day
have also created an opportunity at the
kind of smaller scale with less
repercussions than with projects for
experimentation risk and failure to be
present and part of the daily process in
the office so sugarhouse Studios has
also been the arena for large larger
scales of experimentation and failure it
provided us space to edit physical
fabric of a building make and the first
version of the studio was in the kind of
light industrial sheds near Stratford we
had to pay very little rent in return
for creating a kind of cinema and
cultural amenity for the wider community
so that was at least given to us by the
an OB LC which doesn't exist anymore has
evolved into the LDC but was essentially
basically an organisation looking at the
development or along the fringes of the
Olympic Park and incidentally actually
our second project was also came out of
Olympics money so it's kind of a funny
twist but actually we probably wouldn't
exist if the Olympics hadn't have
happened in London which is kind of yeah
and something to reflect on and yeah I
guess our practice was a kind of him
residency in this place so we spent time
building connections with other groups
and organizations in the area
collaborating on programming developing
ideas for projects thinking about how to
address public space around Stratford
High Street we tested out different
iterations of
built forms within the space and they
kind of had evolving purposes and uses
as the business model changed within
them we learned a lot about adaptation
and about how to do budgeting the wrong
way around and about around yeah around
about the same time that the first
version of the space when it was
pizzeria and cinema was failing
we met workshop East to a collective of
carpenters who recently graduated out of
building crass college and they became a
kind of key anchor tenants for
sugarhouse totally fundamental to
changing the nature of the space and it
became much more focused on craft
production and making and yeah just kind
of expanded from there any in 2016 we
moved to Berman's Enoch and into an old
college building having brought lots of
our tenants and recruited new ones from
Stratford so we now have a wood workshop
metal workshop ceramics studio alongside
music studios fine artists they're all
kind of focused on around the core of
common facilities probably providing a
collegiate way of working or a
collective culture with which we've
tried to advocate and create structures
for in other projects and those are the
kind of workspace projects that were
really trying to support making spaces
that have a particular focus so the one
in Brixton has a textile focus and then
the one in Greenwich is going to have
space for kind of larger industrial
processes but all of them are kind to
attempting to replicate and build on the
lessons learnt from sugarhouse
so they include communal kitchen and the
project space for education and public
events that the management of the space
should also be done by a tenant so the
relation to the space and its uses in
the kind of more horizontal manner has a
more horizontal aspect to it and again
to have a kind of key anchor tenants
this is Steve from macho East that sets
the tone for the types of facilities
that are shared for the rest of the
studios and as we were developing our
own space and this and having to address
all these questions and learning
positive things through a process of
failure essentially we were thinking a
lot about different business models and
the space that the process and the
spatial form of sugarhouse afforded us
to think about different ways of
operating and that we could start
developing projects that thought about
design not as just physical and material
exercises but also as ones that relate
to kind of cultural infrastructure
supporting certain types of activity to
exists and ways of relating to the built
environment
so this is Black Horse Workshop which
was which is a public access workshop
space an education space set up in
Wilson Stowe has a kind of like tiered
structure of a public space where people
can come and go to the cafe then there's
like the professional well there's a
mature access through like workshops and
training programs then there's like
another layer of professionals using
space so it's a really nice way of kind
of collapsing worlds into one
physicality and that's been running for
four years now and this has an extension
and we kind of sit on the board of that
the second organizational project I
guess that was also a spatial and
architectural one was Baltic Street
adventure playground
which was trying to think about
children's relationship to environment
where there's like lots of top-down
planning initiatives happening and on
the scale of a master plan this is
happening in Glasgow so there's it was a
commission that came out of the
Commonwealth Games and these kids
basically were going to be having their
childhoods kind of surrounded by huge
amounts of hoarding and and demolition
and so it was trying to think about a
space that could stand and counter to
that where they can have access all the
time and they would have control and
they could see transparently what was
going on so it's really an organization
that has been involved around trying to
create opportunities for the kids to
continually have a say in how the space
changes and how it and will develop and
continue to be edited by them over time
Graeme workshop is a kind of different
kettle of fish this was an architectural
ceramics manufacturer that we set up in
2015 which came out with a kind of
housing projects in a neighborhood in
Liverpool and this has essentially been
a kind of exercise and reflection on
what it means to be a business situated
in a community and to try and think
about aspects of community involvement
and education but also ownership models
that can transfer shares and or bonds or
other means of investment to the to the
workers and to people who live in the
neighbourhood and yeah Graeme workshops
really been focused on trying to address
this balance between our interest in
craft and a and a capacity to produce
things at scale so trying to like still
maintain an aesthetic that can be unique
in each thing that it produces and is
still being made by hand and
isn't hidden in the outcomes of the
products but can still interact with
machinery that is essentially produced
for producing is essentially made for
producing things that are all exactly
identical so trying to like play with
that tension I guess yeah
so I've explained a little bit about a
little bit about our initial lack of
internal hierarchy and how we had to
kind of disrupt we had to address we had
to create structures to address and
disrupt arising hierarchies that just
came out of other aspects of being and
working in the world but again these
kind of most recent changes still need
to acknowledge differences and I guess
this is just the kind of continual
challenge of designing spaces and
designing structures that can be
supportive and make change but not
prescriptive and afford difference in
terms of like a governance and legal
form maybe this isn't really open day
stuff but I just thought I'd six it's
quite interesting the production of
projects has also led to a kind of like
trail of subsidiaries which take
different forms be that's manufacturing
through granny workshop or construction
and these are now kind of being invalid
by like partnership which will take
ownership over all of those things
beneath it so it means you can kind of
continue to pursue that lots of
different kinds of work but you still
have a overarching legal structure and
it ties you together our practice is
really an act of kind of building
checking and exploring our trust in one
another both in relation to the
opportunities that come from collective
work also the responsibilities and
accountabilities we have from each other
so it's constantly an active balancing
practice and work or behaviors that are
scalable and the principal characters of
our internal interactions based on
cumulative value of varied and different
voices attempts to try and reflect
itself through approach
and and hopefully some of what I
described will will hints at this but
for those of you who haven't started
studying architecture from the RIBA kind
of stages of work is a framework that we
use here in the UK that kind of
describes and sets out the process and
levels of information that you need to
produce a different certain stages in a
project and it goes from naught to seven
so from strategic definition to in youth
and I'd like and I guess I kind of
conceit but I'm trying to say with the
slide is that we're trying to talk about
an expanded form of practice beyond that
so from minus one perhaps to think about
something self initiated projects
identifying needs challenging
assumptions mashup mapping resources
giving time to listen and just stay in
conversation with communities it's not
just about kind of strategizing and then
at the other end of that we also are
involved in the kind of ongoing
management of projects and B that
buildings or other kinds of spaces so I
guess the people in this room and in
this building and more broadly as a part
of this association have really
influential roles to play in the
development and evolution of the
architectural profession profession and
we I think at this moment in time all
have a more obviously urgent
responsibility to acknowledge that
everything is interconnected our design
decisions our supply chains the personal
relationships and working structures we
build this is all the work every
decision about how you build teams
around you formulas you're working
structure where you locate your practice
will impact the nature of the
architecture that you produce and unless
we specifically make attempts to work in
new ways that value things other than
those made obvious or desirable through
capitalism we will continue to replicate
current working culture subsequently
building in problem
assumptions to our practice and
ultimately the architecture we create so
we need to start actively cultivating a
really broad and powerful consensus that
political solidarity and consciousness
needs to be a part of the professional
identity of the transnational architects
and we cannot continue to practice as we
have before we cannot conceive of
ourselves as individuals extracted from
the collective context of architectural
practice we need to have a kind of sea
change in terms of our like professional
orientation and we need to both critique
ourselves and challenge each other about
the role that we perform in the current
global crisis when you know when we as
as those involved in the building the
story and this is going to be you guys
have influence on how huge quantities of
money and resources and materials are
being extracted moved and used
sustainability as its described in the
current situation is not sustainable and
by taking no action in opposition to the
problems our profession is complicit in
we allow them to perpetuate I guess so
as kind of a Verrilli alluded to at the
beginning in the past our practice has
been kind of used to represent a
celebrated the mode of of alternative
practice and it really at one point
became quite tokenistic and I and I
wanted to that obviously precludes real
cultural change and it just typifies the
alternative as one possible type in an
attempt to contain it and I think this
talk and a series of conversations that
are happening at this moment in time is
the first step in the stand against that
and there are many other collectives
businesses and independent practitioners
organizing in countless different forms
working all over the world to challenge
the current way in which the built
environment is developed describes and
conceptualized here is there's some
names of a few and I have not included
voluntary organizations housing
cooperatives of land Trust's and because
I'm assuming this room contains people
interested in earning a living working
in built environment and some of these
were not architects are concerned with
the creation of space or the culture of
work some do not practice anymore some
are well-known some are only just
starting and I wanted to leave this
slide
during questions so that people have
time to note down a few names and look
not later or tomorrow or in a few months
or in a couple of years I guess this
process of kind of expanding our are
learning from working collectively is
gonna be happening over the next yeah
and we'll be publishing things online
and hopefully physically as well so that
will it also that will include some of
the stuff we've been talking about today
but also are the management tools that
contractual information and policies and
terms and conditions like things that
will just help you do work in a way that
is protected so yeah get in touch with
us if you're keen to find out more thank
you for listening
[Applause]
