right well first of all thank you for
having me so I'm psychologist I've never
before spoken to a group of architecture
students and professionals deep learning
curve and a bit of a kind of dip into
the unknown for me but it's a little bit
of background on me so until about II
but a few months ago I was
pro-vice-chancellor have my dream job
and I was kind of quite happy with that
but also very very concerned about our
concerned about the climate crisis which
was unfolding rapidly and dramatically
before our eyes and and I decided that
I'd like my efforts probably best place
to become more of an activist so I got
involved in scientist burning and
extinction rebellion and much to my
boss's shock and horror I quit my job
and gave him a month's notice and said
bye okay so so I came to the debate on
climate break day and somewhat late in
the day sort of a figure in Australia
figure out well you know as a
psychologist what could I contribute
because you know most of the debate had
been most of the participants have been
climate scientists geoengineers and
people people like that but I came to
very quickly appreciate that the heart
of the issue is in fact a disconnect
between humanity and nature and I see
this disconnect as a kind of
asymmetrical thing in that we humans
have kind of forgotten who we are and
this is a quote I picked up from Rowan
Williams who led a meditation for
extinction rebellion back in April I
think we I think I think humanity has
essentially forgotten who we are we
somehow see ourselves as removed from
the natural world but it's asymmetrical
because I think I mean nature doesn't
respect it doesn't respect who we are it
doesn't respect you the status that we
have doesn't respect how much money we
have any of those things because we are
actually part of the living system and
so put differently then I think we need
to recognize that we are a part of it
all as opposed to being a part from it
all and we're not setting up me into the
laws of nature but I've used for many
months over how we manage to get
ourselves into into what is effectively
a gigantic mess with co2 emissions
rising with no concerted or no no
proportionate responses from guv
globally and nationally with were
starting to see governments and councils
and educational institutions declaring a
client's emergency but there's no
consistency in terms of you know what
that declaration actually means and
there are varying commitments from
institutions in terms of what they're
actually prepared to do but for me the
bottom line is that I'm seeing very
little finds and evidence that but
institutions are doing what they need to
do and certainly not doing it at the
pace they need to do it at and they're
being hamstrung by systemic issues
specifically the kind of economic system
that we've somehow conjured up so we
have an economic system that values
efficiency rather than climate safety
which I find somewhat ironic because
it's an economic system is horrendously
inefficient I spend a lot of time
talking to economists which is a very
interesting thing and to engineers to
try to understand their sort of take on
the economy and why it is that we've
made ourselves slaves to a financial
system that is in fact destroying life
on on earth which potentially could
include us
I'm not catastrophizing there so for
what may be psychology something to say
about this after all for me a big
question is how to be how to affect what
what needs to be a massive great
transition bigger than that and that is
effectively the challenge we face and
it's what motivated me to set up what I
sort of grandly called the transition
lab which is going to work with NGOs and
we'll be working with scientists we were
just about to launch a new press open
letter and I'm really really pleased to
say that a that by the thousand of the
UK's most eminent scientists have signed
up to this letter and I said look you
know we we have to get acting and we
have to get moving now and one of the
interesting things about talking with
engineers is they're inherently problem
solvers they don't procrastinate and
when I left the conversation with a with
a professor of engineering he came but
she said to me so the bottom line is
what are we all going to do on Monday
you know we can't hang around waiting we
can't keep talking
we can't keep planning and the time to
do research it's kind of come to an end
to sort of know what we need to do you
know the issue is why are we not getting
on and
there are two things I'd like to mention
them which i think is sort of relevant
to the kinds of things you've been
hearing about the first is education so
I actually left the system I had left
the educational system because I felt
that as some would believe that you can
change your system and the best way to
do that from within I actually feel that
doing it from outside is probably going
to be more effective and the other thing
I'd like to mention just briefly is
language and communication and I've been
very struck by some of the pieces I've
been reading recently around magic which
I thought would have absolutely nothing
to do with this discussion is to open in
fact I think it does but what we what we
do in our everyday language and
communication I'll talk about just three
things we want is a sort of verification
of labels and this is particularly the
case was something like capitalism and
we sort of we have we have expanded
capitalism to be this massive great
beast that somehow needs to be
slaughtered and killed but these are
constructs that we have created
ourselves the other thing I want to talk
about briefly here is is what's called
corporate triumphalism and those aren't
a narrative that somehow we are up
against it we're up against the elites
we're up against the banks the global
economic system and it's going to be
sustained
and I think what we need to think about
is an alternative narrative which which
has a different kind of ending you know
a narrative where we're actually looking
at an economic system which is which is
crumbling it's falling apart and I think
the challenge for us is well how are we
going to reimagine what our futures
might be and this is something that
George mambi ohs talked about I've got
some length and then the final point is
around these rescue dialogues and I hear
that a lot in activist circles where the
activists sort of see themselves as
having to rescue planet Earth from the
big bad fossil fuel companies and that
kind of it's an example of sort of
binary and ternary thinking where we
have these different agents that fulfill
different kind of perceived roles and my
view is that we need to to to make
progress we need to return to what I
call unary flipping I'm going to end
with the words of Katie singer we can't
be part of the solution unless until
become we become aware that we are part
of
problem okay time next time Tim Waterman
I'm part of the new program in landscape
architecture at the Bartlett School of
Architecture just up the street which i
think is very exciting and and
particularly well timed given that every
institutions center is going to have to
shift every institution's assumptions
are going to have to shift and that
Landscape Architecture actually does
that
I hope quite effectively at the Bartlett
and indeed I think it's Blanche's is is
here as well and it's a good time for
both of us to announce that the students
at the Bartlett School of Architecture
have appealed to the school to declare
climate emergency and that's just
happened officially today and what I
think is particularly good about the way
that the Bartlett has done this and that
the students and staff have encouraged
it to do is to think not about promoting
the school in this instance but actually
really talking about collaboration
cooperation reaching outside and
reaching across disciplinary and
professional boundaries or in fact even
kind of dissolving those boundaries so
that we can really get things done so
there may we hope be a post disciplinary
future ahead for the Bartlett School of
Architecture um so knowledge and
architecture oftentimes as appear in our
heads with a with a capitalization in
front of them architecture with a
capital a knowledge with a capital a and
we have to get beyond thinking of
ourselves in that way we need to start
thinking in the plural we need to start
thinking about knowledge as being
multiplied constructed and constructed
in places and with places and made with
places what donna haraway calls simple
yeeeeesss making width and also in terms
of the architectures to think about
those in the plural allows us to think
about being not part of a monolithic
profession but being in something that's
in dialogue
it's about built habitats and that can
include people who are makers of space
from people who make landscapes to
people who make infrastructure and
engineering to people who make mud huts
and bamboo structures all across this
entire range so in terms of landscape
and why this word I think is
particularly important to this whole
structure is that in about the past 20
or 30 years the understanding of the
word landscape has shifted drastically
so we all tend to think about landscape
as something that's kind of framed
within a golden frame and it pictures a
place often a verdant place the suffix
scape has recently been theorized to be
cognate with the word ship with the
suffix ship so to be in a landscape is
like being in a relationship or a
friendship or a companionship
comradeship it's reciprocal and when we
talk and I take some issue with the last
with with the keynote that when we talk
about embedded cognition when we talk
about embedded relationships we're
talking about thinking that happens in
and with place through language through
the foods we eat through the through the
scenes we set with one another and
understanding the multiplicity of those
and coming to terms with one of those
with all of those seems to me not a gray
and muddy and frightening conversation
but actually the really bright beautiful
one that I'm excited about having and I
think that we can all be excited about
having this conversation is about human
and Planetary and multi species
flourishing and until we see a picture
of that what we want to become we need
to become utopians we need to see from
the point of the other we need to be
able to construct whole new worlds in
our imaginations to draw them as
architects and landscape architects as
practitioners of the architectures to
see these places in what they might be
in the future our imagination
rich and we can help each other together
to make them richer okay hi hello sorry
very nervous public speaker my I've got
some slides I'm sorry about that the
other two you've just spoken
off-the-cuff which is fabulous and but I
thought I'd show you a couple of things
that I think might be useful for the
conversation the first thing I do want
to say though is congratulations to all
the students for all your hard work and
you have been amazing and inspirational
and if we old people have anything to
take from this this is that we can do
stuff hopefully to be of use together so
you have to make us work okay we can be
the donkey's who do the legwork you you
your voice is so important you have no
idea how much power you have as students
by the way actually I wasn't going to
say this but I'm gonna say this
you pay your fees and you hold the
reputation of the institution in your
hands you could destroy the reputation
of all these institutions within a week
and they would be I mean we sorry would
be lost without you so just realize your
power and and and don't let the
institution's forget that it's really
important okay having said that so it's
just for me to speak I always get a bit
embarrassed that it's me speaking other
people but anyway um I'm gonna say
mostly when you talk people remember
about three things even if you talk for
three hours they still only remember the
first three things that you say so now
one of them is how powerful you are so
but I wanted to say these things which I
think are important to this conversation
one is that we can develop our social
consciousness and very often I think
I've heard in this conversation about
architecture is is certainly not about
architecture actually this is about how
we think and how we live together and
how we relate um that you know it's not
our problem we're given a job by clients
we're told what to do
or by our tutor and told what to do and
so developing a social consciousness and
a conscience I don't mean in terms of
blame or judgmentalism I just mean
awareness of how most people live and
work in the world and our impact we are
the 1% in this room we are the most
privileged I know some of you struggle
financially very much so I mean I have
done but but we're still the 1% and so
we are consciousness it's important to
be aware of our power also in that sense
- right but awareness the impact that we
have understanding and exploring nature
or living system so embedding this
ecological embedding ecology and
ecological thinking is essential I mean
this is really I mean I think if
somebody said you know there's no
respect for humans well that's probably
quite right I don't think we probably
deserve it but to be honest we are part
of a system and as the Yellowstone Park
showed when you reintroduce people that
when you take people out of managing a
system that they're part of managing
we've seen it with the you Sunni tribe
in Brazil or with people in Yellowstone
or elsewhere that system can
disintegrate people are positive they
can have a positive a super beneficial
role and human nature of course is part
of nature so we are an intrinsic part of
that beautiful system and coming
together is a really important thing I
think everybody said that however as
John said in the introduction you know
how are we all going to get together if
we all don't get along we don't agree
but that's the whole point and alcohols
very useful for that the fourth thing is
make nature your client now I'm only
saying client because we're in a sort of
room full of like nerdy architects and
designers and people like that so these
are the sort of linguistics that we use
right clients and all that budgets
psyched plan and things oh my god how
dull but if you decide to make nature
your client you open a door into a
phenomenal world that is going on
outside
and that means you have to get out in it
as well it's very important that we work
less and have more fun now I mean in a
non privilege kind of way some serious
stuff the president of the US said in
his election campaign in 2016 that
terrorism is not the greatest threat to
humanity environmentalists are and
unfortunately we've seen over the last
20 years more people murdered in who are
environmentalists protectors earth
protectors defenders of land than almost
any other walk of life half the number
of the US forces that were killed in
Iraq and Afghanistan over the last 20
years they that's the number of
environmentalists and protectors who've
been murdered there is a real battle
it's not with each other it's with
ideologies and thinking how we think is
so important and over here in this nice
temperate climate of the UK we're a long
way from the majority world when most
natural resources are being mined and
extracted at a rate that we cannot
conceive of so this is Michelle I've
forgotten her earlier campus whose
father and grandfather were murdered and
also her teacher in September 2015 for
posing mining in the Philippines and
this is happening all over the world
this is you may have come across her I
don't know Berta Caceres who also was
murdered who was opposing a
hydroelectric dam and so on so these are
the people who are working to defend
nature and ecology these are not
theoretical concepts you know I mean I
enjoy theorizing and philosophizing as
much as the next person of an evening
but there's a very real situation which
is that architecture the built
environment is extracting and
responsible for 40% plus of global co2
emissions that means we have an enormous
opportunity to do good if our impact at
the moment is so terrifyingly bad we
have an amazing opportunity to do
something really positive but the
extractive industries we are intimately
in bed with them as a you know the built
environment uses
so many of these natural resources
mining and extraction logging and so on
however we have a natural system it
manages our weather our climate our food
chain most of all our living systems and
most of our food our social processes
and cultural processes are well are
related to it the European Union's
strategy for climate change adaptation
is to bring plants soil and nature into
cities we can do that it can be our job
so using an ecosystem services approach
I know this isn't very philosophical
it's very practical but there are
practical things we can do nature based
solutions nature isn't always green
nature isn't always pretty in an
aesthetic sense we have to change what
we think of as beautiful the way that
we've looked in the past in terms of
beauty has been hardly ever
performance-related and we now have a
performance issue it's the physics that
we're confronting this is a sea slug
it's powered by solar energy there's a
lot in nature that architects could do
well to have fun exploring and finding
out about this it's really interesting
and we're such a monoculture architects
we hardly ever get out of the studio
something I want to say well done for
the ad process you know get together and
socialize
you cannot activate unless you collect
together this is just New York City's
response to Hurricane sandy is to bring
plants soil and water into the city to
defend itself in terms of getting
together we need to reach out beyond our
own communities these are two people who
have massively influenced me and neither
of them are architects they are both
urban ecologists one's a master planner
and ecologist dusty gage on the Left
Gary grant on the right there are
millions of people all over the world
who we need to talk to and share
information with yeah this is
student-led but everybody's got to do
their bit the most important thing is to
do something
immediate so as Tim said we've declared
an emergency it's more of an ecological
emergency even than a climate emergency
really but the main thing in terms of
action is we're going to form a
citizen's assembly we have a register of
intent from each module and unit to say
what they are going to do to apply and
align with the crisis and how they're
going to enact it in their module briefs
and so on and how assessment can change
also to look for it in the work that's
produced and we're going to be recording
that and sharing it with people too so
I'm really but we need everybody's help
we can't do it on our own the Bartlett
is only one jumped-up institution
amongst many so I'm looking forward very
much to sorry to say that because I know
that's so insulting and I okay well now
they know
thanks for inviting me to speak but
looking forward to the conversation now
hi everyone I am a jumped-up student
from the Bartlett I've escaped the CEO
for a bit I've skipped the CEO for two
years so I'm part of the first cohort of
the by integrating design losses UCL and
it's a joint course shared by the bottom
school of architecture and the
biochemical engineering department and
it's to sort of introduce both
disciplines to each other and to get
them to talk and work with each other
and from my perspective I used to be an
architect and I really wanted to move
away from this sort of digital sort of
image of nature and sort of aesthetic
sort of emergence to something more
versatile for tacit understanding of how
biochemistry actually works and how to
implement that into design systems so
yeah I appreciate the big push from that
you see on violet to sort of get on out
the studio and
learn about other disciplines so I think
both of you mentioned in in your
discussion the idea of bringing soil
back to cities and somehow that seems
like a very interesting kind of
trajectory that we can think about in
terms of embedding this understanding
and how we can actually as architects
work with soil because as as you all
know I mean when whenever we construct a
building or any kind of infrastructure
we're always entombing soil right or
we're stripping it away we're letting
you erode and we were essentially
degrading soil and we're losing so much
of globally so much soil and one of the
main reasons accept erosion is
architecture his construction is pouring
of concrete and somehow this embedding
can can think of soil definitely thank
you that's such an interesting question
and the whole idea of growing and
embedding and you know the nutrients
that feed us and so on soil health is is
one of the risks that we've one of the
boundaries the planetary boundaries that
we're actually confronting at the moment
so it's a really important thing that
the opportunity that cities have that
may be easier to do in cities in fact
than the sort of surrounding areas at
the moment is to support healthy soils
and habitat and biodiversity because
there's a lot less use of pesticides and
chemicals and and so on and yeah I think
I mean well
Sedgwick price used to talk in this room
he said is your building really
necessary and the first law of is to
really question I mean that's our role
right in academia or any way is to
question everything question question
everything but the whole point of what
you're doing and the impact of it so the
opportunity of bringing soil into city
is great obviously plants will help cool
and we can restore nature and so on
but I I'm sure the others will have
something more interesting to say about
it I've got lots to say about soil um
considering that that's what landscape
architecture kind of begins with is soil
and I think it's also really important
for us to think about when we're
thinking about about climate change and
biodiversity and the ecological crisis
that faces us when you take the train
through Britain you look out at mile
after mile kilometres after kilometer of
plowed fields it's true that if we
didn't till the soil that we could
actually capture carbon in the soil so
something as simple as performing
agriculture without tilling soil and
reapplying Carboniferous forms of
fertilizer to those soils manure these
kinds of things
old-fashioned practices and our cities
certainly produce plenty of manure we
just can't use it because what comes out
of us is toxic because of what we eat we
eat things that are not allowed to be
consumed by farm animals according to
European Union law because it's not safe
um so so really to think about soil as a
way of thinking and a way of engaging
and when we build buildings they're not
a replacement for soil so there's a
fetishization of of urban agriculture
and vertical gardens and things like
that
agriculture still needs to happen in the
soil under the Sun in order to make our
food supply affordable so these kind of
fantasy solutions are really in many
ways fiddling while Rome burns we do
need to provide soil and stop building
on quite so much fertile soil
um when speaking about soils and I'm I'm
not an expert on this but I've been
researching peatland and in the first
year of my Master's and and I wanted
actually I wanted to ask you a question
now I forgot
maybe I'll just continue speaking and so
what is happening in Germany is that you
have those agricultural landscapes and
in the end these landscapes have been
before peatlands well wetlands and
they've all been drained for agriculture
and I think in the end the question is
because in the end you can't actually
use REE wet those lands and Germany
because once they re wetted you can't
use them as a farmer anymore you can't
be a farm anymore because you can't use
those landscapes because they become
well in the end they're protected by
policy so and do you think that it's not
only um we shouldn't maybe not only
think about architects that are
destroying soils but maybe we should
also think about how we can change
policies when I'm thinking about soils
do you have something to say to that as
an landscape architect's policy as
relates to soil well what's really
interesting is if you look at what the
the primary group to promote organic
agriculture in the United Kingdom it's
called the Soil Association and their
primary interest is with soil health and
returning nutrients to the soil and and
not continuing to erode soils and so on
and so forth so III think actually
everyone who eats organic knows that
they're participating in a much larger
cycle that that it's not just about
their own health or the health of their
children that they're eating organic
because it has impacts in various ways
including on soils on ecosystems I
people make choices that are far more
sophisticated than we give them credit
for and policy can certainly reflect
that policy can be constructed on
multiple ways that that look upon
multiple forms of engagement multiple
forms of activity in things like like
soil also we can take you know we could
be really selfish about some of these
things so I like Scotch right
peat is is one of the things that
flavors Scotch
Pete is totally sustainable for Scotch
if that's all we use it for so but that
gives you kind of some of an idea of the
scale at which we can sustainably use I
mean that's actually a tiny amount of
the peat that's consumed every year hi
my name is Fatima third year student
here at the AAA
I want to start by saying thank you you
all three of you spoke with a great
sense of urgency and clarity on the
issue which is really refreshing to hear
you mentioned declaring an emergency at
the Bartlett just today which is great
and then you spoke about the sort of
students assembly I wonder if you could
speak more about that process what that
looks like has students participate and
and sort of can help mandate change
within the institution I think this
relates to the system change not climate
change thing right so changing systems
is a whole process and it's actually
quite difficult to start but once it's
off and running it's got its own
momentum so deciding to change is the
first thing humans are really bad at
deciding to change but we're really good
at adapting and being creative in a
change process and and also once the
changes have been made they become
embedded quite quickly and they stay so
it's quite important that short period
of time of change process is an enormous
opportunity but it's also it's really
precious so sorry this is a sort of
roundabout way of saying there isn't a
structure or a process for that yet it's
a new thing and I know citizens
assemblies are being set up and have
been set up around the world around the
country and so on but I think that's
this is all a new process and to presume
that there's an existing system I think
this goes back to what Allison was
saying actually about fighting
monolithic structures that are largely
in our head as like
because the castle you know we invent
these systems and we make them as well
so there is no castle there is no sit at
all to fight it's all about doing things
together and forming a citizen's
assembly the most important thing I that
I think is important in it is that it's
student-led I don't mean that students
know everything or have to do all the
work or anything like that but if the
student voice you know institutions need
to be checked there needs to be
oversight there needs to be independent
scrutiny and the students are the best
people to do that we have to listen to
you when you fill in your student
feedback forms those turn up in meetings
and we discuss what you say it's really
important that you use your voice and I
think the citizens assembly at the
Bartlett hopefully can reinforce that
ownership of the conversation and view
us as they're a supportive staff and I
mean all staff not just teaching staff
operations staff people who do the
cleaning people who serve people who
maintain that photocopies whatever so
citizen assembly is usually a
representative body drawn from across
all the walks of life that it's we got
that it's related to and there's an
opportunity to reach out also to other
institutions too to help with that
oversight process too in general this is
about opening up and working less and
doing more the other thing I really
wanted to say as well by the way is that
productivity is not learning this is
what I mean about getting out of the
studio and having fun is you've got a
subconscious that can only work when
you're not working and it is your
support system so if you work and work
and work being productive you're not
being you're not having fun for a start
and you're not learning and you know the
learning process is reflection you do
that when you're not working
productivity is something that we
imagine
to be necessary and in fact narratives
in the imaginary are really really
important to this so Benedict Anderson
wrote the book imagine communities where
he says that nations are imagined
constructs you know it just you just
need to have enough people buy into the
idea and all of a sudden you have a
nation-state so there's nothing
permanent about England for example it's
just an imaginary so if we can come
together to construct the new
imaginaries maybe new ideas that include
more than just people then that's really
important and I think that's that's
we're not saying at the Bartlett we need
to get rid of plastic cups we need to
get rid of you know that's not system
change we need to change the way that we
think about approaching things from top
to bottom including who governs what if
any governing is needed at all sorry
well thank you for the or the
information you guys have brought up in
the discussion but I'm really fascinated
on how actually language have kind of
shaped our culture and created this
capitalism system and it's very
interesting that you guys brought up
nature as a client as a client that
after we leave the education system that
will make a part of our everyday work
but how exactly can it be a client when
it doesn't pay where your actual client
doesn't see it as a client and often
that is see is it more of an enemy than
client I'm just wondering for all three
of you what's your suggestion or pinyon
or solution even for this any because
it's my fault for bringing it up there
and the point is it does pay and it pays
in innumerable ways and the main one of
course is it's our life support system
it's our natural health service
everything comes from from nature and
biodiversity and
my diversity is life so the second thing
is how come we don't know what nature
does for us and how come you know our
conventional clients aren't aware of it
this I personally think goes back to an
advocate though there's a separation
definitely between people in nature or
has been but I don't think it's actually
true for all people
I think architecture lost its way when
it decided that nature was outside the
city and buildings and people were
inside the city and ever since then
we've had a problem there's there's
other things too with land use and
values of land and stuff like that we
get to explain to a client the value of
nature to their to their development is
something that has to be a policy driven
because developers won't necessarily
make that decision on their own and
there is new policy and it comes in for
that but educating ourselves and
explaining why it's a good thing to do
in terms of value not financial
necessarily yes it hasn't been on Excel
spreadsheets for four projects but it it
is to a certain extent now there is more
understanding of the value of nature to
a development if that's what you're
talking about
but in terms of this is why cities and
city planning is so important and in
fact the insurance industry has been
looking at this for a long time because
it's sick of paying out for climate
impacts so Munich Re has a huge Climate
Research Center and professor peter herb
who's the head of it has been developing
all kinds of ways of supporting cities
through insurance to implement green
infrastructure nature based solutions to
reduce climate risk and climate impacts
because they can't afford to pay out for
either the insurance companies and these
are big insurance companies okay so
Philadelphia's had numerous impact storm
surges and flooding so on and and the
insurance companies there have been
looking at how they can support them
with infrastructure and it's to be
developed for sure you know but it's a
policy across the world and
you can see it happening in cities
around the world doing it it's a policy
based hi hi you spoke earlier about the
soil and this is something of interest
to me because even is a vegan myself we
all talk about saving the animals and
the pigs and the cows and stuff but
knowing there's complete cognizance to
the fact that the animals are reliant on
the soil the soil is reliant on the
nematodes in the soil and you've got a
case of colony collapse of bees and
colony collapse of insects and
earthworms as well so I just find
interesting that we've completely
overshot that but my question was with
the regards to the soil so you get these
when I've looked at the state of gherkin
then also in India as well the resources
is not just coal that is coming out
these countries this lifting is cobalt
it's bauxite and what do you need when
you are building your eco-friendly green
New Deal wind turbine you need coal you
need to lift them you need all these
minerals you need the magnets from China
you have to destroy the soil in tons of
chemicals in the land and the same in
India as well but when I see the wind
turbines solar panels here that sold to
us as the green you do if anyone was
interested in supply chains and
understood it they would have gone right
back to the soil people ask me what's
the solution so I just dare to ask the
architects in this room how much do
people have recognition or understanding
awareness of materials like industrial
hemp and bamboo for which you don't have
to rape the soil you don't have to dig
up the trees in the forests
you just have to grow the plant and I'm
not talking about you know growing apart
for smokier that's another thing which
is nice but for structural engineered
stuff when I was at the cop 24 last year
the Chinese
country section was showing structurally
engineered bamboo for building two floor
high water piping
and my question is is that if we were to
really be sincere about this act now
prophecy that was actually been echoed
by black and brown people the last 50
years
then we should really be looking at the
mineral the resources that they've been
surviving on a basic level for hundreds
of years and specifically hemp but I
just wanted to get people's thoughts on
the solution which is in Yorkshire it's
in sorry it's in Ireland the biggest
growers and builders of buildings are
yours
but are we paying attention to that and
actually saying the solutions right up
backyard and how can we actually
engineer the solution a natural organic
solution right now instead of actually
misappropriating land and taking land
rights from the people in the global
south
thank you the main thing I would say to
that is that we can't throw anything out
we can't throw any idea out that we tend
you know techno optimism tells us that
you know we can engineer a whole new
future out of out of new materials but
then there's also this kind of atavistic
sense that we need to go back to living
in mud huts and III think neither one of
them is an absolute thing that we need
to value the history of architecture and
to understand that humans have built
habitats for themselves in harmony with
the forces in the planet around them and
that practices such as pastoralism which
involve animals create settings that are
bio diverse so maybe we don't you know
even saying that the only future is a
vegan one might be of a flawed and
oversimplifying message George Monbiot
Elling us we need to rewilding again
might be an oversimplifying message and
might be a ridiculously purist ik way of
looking at our human engagement with
landships hemp's great it's a really
good building material and there's lots
growing in France most of the hem that's
used here
is imported from France as well actually
and it sports a lot of livelihood so you
get its co-related economic benefits
which is cool it's case by case basis I
guess in terms of our impact can sort
colonial and postcolonial impact on
other countries it's horrendous and we
know about blood diamonds but we don't
think about blood copper blood tin and
so on so we do need to think about what
we use and how we use it for sure first
thing is to reduce energy demand and we
can do that we have to reduce our energy
demand before looking at new industries
to supply lots of energy sort of thing
maybe it'll happen automatically leading
on from what you just said something
that really shocks me is the new sewer
that is being built does not separate
fresh water from fowl this was
considered in the early days and I was
involved in the early consultations it's
too expensive and the fact that the
whole planning system and planning
offices have neither architectural let
alone ecological training is a very very
fundamental problem and obviously living
in a city it's not even a question of
materials of individual buildings you
know you have issues of infrastructure
which are complex you know quite a quick
way of dealing with it I don't want to
close conversations down by saying you
know I'm a very sort of simplistic he
sort of person really I suppose but
that's a lot of money for construction
companies and engineering and it's gonna
cost it was predicted to cost 4.2
billion in 2012 is gonna be well over
eight ten twelve billion if it ever
finishes it probably will that could
have provided the whole of Greater
London with the green infrastructure
required to take the storm water out of
the sewerage system so the fact we've
got combined sewage and water systems is
very dull for most people to think about
but actually it's you know if you can't
deal with your own you've got no
business did trying to tell other people
what to do we don't deal with our chip
very well
I'm not looking after my own Robina
sorry
I mean you know we get there our large
scale composting processes we could we
could go over to methane with sewage and
so on there's a lot of other things that
we can do yeah and all the green
infrastructure could have created
hundreds of jobs for landscape
architects and opportunities for
landscape architectural educators and
horticultural trades people and so on
and so forth so I've got a question I
want to ask Alison would you mind if I
sort of take take that property which is
about language and enak and well and
also academic action because this is
your area of expertise and it's so great
that you're here it's one of your areas
of expertise it'd be great if you could
just say a bit more about that what's
needed by academic institutions
I guess reflecting on my own experiences
and that's in a position of you know
quite a lot of power in the university
where I sort of had carte blanche to do
what I wanted with the curriculum and
and I felt that actually that anything I
was doing in that sense would just be
shuffling the deck chairs around on the
Titanic it wasn't actually going to get
to the crux of the problem which is that
essentially what we are doing with
education is preparing people to go out
and and to boost the economy so you are
in service of the economy which is in a
sense a real a real problem so I'm very
loath to suggest anything that would be
a kind of reformist approach when I
think we need something much more
radical but I think as Blanche said
earlier you guys have immense power and
so what you can actually do is is use
your own voices to shape things like the
kinds of measures that universities are
using so you know I I drove myself mad
just thinking about KPIs and measures of
success and all of these things all of
which is essentially hooked into the
economy and in universities making
enough money and we need to think
differently about what kinds of measures
of success we want to think about so for
example you know GDP needs to be booted
out and replaced with something that's
or qualitative I think but I think for
you it's the case of talking about the
kind of curriculum and the diet that
you're being offered and asking well is
that actually going to enable us to
become planetary stewards and so one of
the takeaways I'd like you to take from
what I've been saying is around this
idea of planetary stewardship and I
think that's a an umbrella theme that
you could use to to bridge all of the
disciplines and actually look at planet
your stewardship from a sort of a lens
of a different discipline and then kind
of all think about how you know you will
come together in that sense and maybe
sort of start a dialogue around around
that and try to think about you know
measures of success in relation to how
effectively you are going to be trained
and equipped to be planetary stewards
for one thing okay yeah that that's
really interesting and the the role of
academics in that what can they do
academics are in a sense delivering
curriculum where there are student
numbers and I think there needs to be a
kind of discussion whereby academics
take responsibility and use their voices
to argue for a different kind of
curriculum because students coming in
can only take what was done off er to
them they can't they can't ask for a
different kind of curriculum because
they are being treated as customers but
I think it's down to the academics to
say you know to talk about particular
curriculum areas and so and to fight for
curriculum areas that are going to be
axed because they seem to be not
profitable and you know those are often
some subjects in the arts and humanities
and you know you know possibly some
other kinds of subjects too that are
perceived to not contribute to the
economy and I think you as academics we
have to raise our voices and actually
resist that strongly and actually are
key for different kinds of measures and
of course then the argument then has to
go back to the government because you
know they are funding higher education
so I think there's a there's a for me a
really interesting debate that should be
had which is what is education for you
know it's not actually it's not actually
for servicing the economy it's actually
for the greater good is the things like
individual well-being finally students
a chip and thinking about how we how we
sort of sit in relation to nature hello
my name is Edward Hutchison I was here
but I'm also a landscape architect last
week I went to a conference on soil in
Henley and I just got two pieces of
factual bits of information which I was
told about about soil
60 million tons of urban soul are
removed every year which represent 26%
of all UK waste the other fact is that
2.9 million tonnes of soil urban
agricultural soil is washed off the land
into the rivers which again which
represents 25% of the EU contribution a
cultural contribution from the UK so 1/3
1/4 bit it just goes straight into the
and basically you know that soil is a is
actually essential for us to really
start to understand understand it
because it's the basis of everything
what we're trying to do is to abolish in
in the kind of changes that we are
trying to work with you to make in our
curriculums what we want to do is we
want to abolish sustainability so we do
not want to learn about sustainability
that's a matter of having an embedded
ecological understanding we want to
somehow create different learning
networks that we are trying to co-create
internally with us and we want to be
climate literate so some student coming
into higher education should perhaps
have as a series of things that they
should kind of know as a part of their
basic literacy in regards to climate in
regards to soil which which would then
kind of you know further the cause of
being a better planetary steward or you
know be literate in those in those terms
as well as I also wanted to hear what
you had to say about this becoming and
obviously this is something we would
like to kind of avoid if this becoming a
hegemonic discourse well you know
everything is green washed and this is
something we are trying to avoid and is
somehow very tricky because whilst
trying to embed this into every aspect
of how we operate how do we how do we
avoid green washing everything great the
the question of Education I'll just be
super brief about this but primer
courses for everybody that starts in
architecture or any other discipline
about the state of the planet and the
critical paths that we're on and the
options and so on the other thing about
green washing is if it needs debate
there's no simple solution things need
to be discussed on a case-by-case basis
and there are no blanket answers for
most things so that that needs
discussion and debate and that's that's
why it's so important to come together
and decide what's best for each
institution or for each course or and
certainly for the planet
I'm sis's sustainability resilience and
then the third one is regenerative
design so sustainability you know don't
do anything worse than what we're doing
now it was kind of basically what that
says resilience says can you take a blow
which is important but actually when we
build we have to build things to be
regenerative which means that that they
have to take on in every respect a duty
of care for human flourishing and for
the flourishing of other species and of
climate and non-human elements so when
we make a building it has to do more
than just house people it has to eat
carbon it has to produce food it has to
be beautiful it has to use materials
that are that are good you know so we
have to think through every process
using ideas of regenerative design and
not just sustainability and resilience
to points that were kind of rushed over
in the various questions I mean the
phone about the first one is in
translation technologies which is
holiday let's go thank you see at the
beginning you talked a lot about ideas
of things like urban farming or vertical
farming being sort of these sort of far
to sort of clean sort of engineered
solutions and really we need to go back
to soil which I completely agree with
but do you think there okay is
transition technologies while we sort of
clean our soils and address our systems
and also do you think there are ways to
make these sort of clean hydroponic
systems more dirty with beneficial
bacteria cultivated within the liquid
systems and do you think that has sort
of would have any benefit and the second
question - I guess everyone was is we
talk a lot about changing education or
change the way we think but again these
all within institutions and most of us
have
of the privilege of time which i think
is incredible but they're incredible
outside of these institutional systems
who are also equally interested in these
questions and are equally interested to
make a change
but they don't have that privilege of
time because for whatever reason they
obsessive commit elsewhere or sort of
focus on their personal finances so how
do you broaden these questions sort of
outside the walls of institutions like
this place and this room to the wider
audience those I've been talking to some
researchers in Australia and people are
associated with project drawdown which
you may have heard about and I think one
of the one of the things that's really
struck me is that is around the lack of
equilibrium and lack of a lever if you
like which would actually enable us to
to work in a way and develop develop
buildings or whatever which are climate
safe so I think the sense of equilibrium
is really important and so what we have
on the one hand is an economic system
that is masquerading as being efficient
in terms of enabling us to prosper and
so forth but there are no checks and
balances there and I think what's needed
is some kind of mechanism that assures
us that something is climate safe so in
terms of conversations that you might
want to have it you might want to think
well how are we actually going to do
that you know how are we actually going
to factor in or develop a lever so that
something can be climate safe and one
one suggestion which is alternative to a
carbon tax is something that's called a
global carbon reward so I'm just going
to put that one out there leave that
leave that with you to sort of have to
think about that but it's a way of sort
of achieving some kind of equilibrium
but in terms of what you can do outside
of your immediate institutional
boundaries and so forth well there's
those activism which were some has been
the kind of the last the last resort
because because nothing else is really
working
you can talk within systems but you were
always always working within
systems that currently exist and that
there's no if there isn't to say that
there isn't an appetite to change but
there are ways in which we can bring
about change simply aren't there and is
simply not available to us I could give
you a number examples I talked about
just one very briefly again I was
talking with another engineer in
Cambridge and we were talking about the
problems that the fashion industry
fast-fashion amount of energy it uses
the amount of co2 it produces that's an
absolute killer um the solution he came
up with was one whereby he suggested
that instead of people buying their
clothes in sort of you know running up
an average three and a half thousand per
individual into twenty six yeah quite
mind-blowing stats that they would
actually they would actually borrow the
clothing and that they would kind of
swap it and so forth and this was seen
as some kind of solution but but for me
that there was no there was no real
solution being proposed in any fad
because what he he and his team were not
addressing was the sort of the initial
root cause of that problem which is why
are we consuming so much you know we we
have to stop consuming we have to stop
consuming in terms of fast fashion in
terms of vehicles you know we can't sort
of appease our conscience and think that
because we've got an electric vehicle
somehow we are doing good actually we're
not because you know we are mining all
sorts of rare minerals and actually
exacerbating the problem potentially um
so sorry I forgot where I was going with
that I self off in a bit of a rag I
could I could pick up yeah I can ask you
a quick question I'm or just make a
comment my name is ed wall another
landscape architect's apologies a great
comment house and should be consumed
less architecture it should we close
down architecture schools
okay very briefly because I'm not the
expert here I say no no I mean look at
the culprit here is its concrete
it's the processes that involved in you
in developing concrete it's the energy
that's used and it's the
- so forth but there's some really
really clever work being done by people
like for example Paul Chatterton who's
been talking about how to save our
cities if 50% of the world's population
lives in cities we have to reimagine
cities and so architects are not the
problem you guys need to be part of the
solution because around something like
40% of energy is consumed is goes into
buildings and buildings responsible for
a huge percentage of co2 emissions yeah
yeah yeah we have lots of lots of
schools that produce thinkers and that's
a good thing what what we actually do is
the problem so you know discussion and
debate is it should always be open more
education less work and I was inspired
mainly last in my first year through
Blanche's talks that we had and I kind
of became aware of the problem that the
the industry that I'm going into is that
it takes it's such a big problem in in
the bigger problem that is the climate
emergency and I think that you're
talking a lot about in institutional
change but what me and probably most
people here with we're quite young
architects and new to the industry so if
we go into a bigger firm into some of
the bigger firms it's it's relatively
we're relatively insignificant in the
whole design process and this summer I
was lucky enough to work for a company
that actually director Hal has a column
in a magazine so I wrote and he handed
the column over to me for the month of
August and I wrote about what I think my
generation wants in housing and it was
to the industry to the housing in about
house building industry but how can what
how and what how and what can we do in
when we go into the industry so outside
of
the institution but still in our
industry to make change and create
change when we're not necessarily at the
top because that will be too late David
Harvey in his book spaces of Hope which
i think is a good title to to think
about that that you know we want to
build better for the future he talks
about insurgent architecture he talks
about being within the body of the beast
and being an insurgent within it so
that's one thing is is you know to be
aware that you can change things
incrementally and that has to happen as
well as the major system change but the
other thing is your collective voice as
a student Blanche has already made it
clear that your voices together count
for a hell of a lot and can move us who
are the old farts at the top of the food
chain they can move us to make real
significant changes and that is also
true within practice and within
development processes architects
landscape architects and and and urban
designers and others of those that same
stripe I think we need to take control
of development processes we need to
become thoughtful considerate developers
who are stewards and and not hand that
off to the [ __ ]
hi I better stand up my name is iki
young and I'm a news journalist for near
times and it's very fascinating about
this story like batteries a social
consciousness because we're told not
only to do from the school but also from
the international arena leh we have a
currently we have the trickle-down
economic policy or trickle-down climate
changing policy which is initiated by
our one of our most respectful President
Ronald Reagan and but after this this
policy doesn't work and that is why
probably why we have such a dilemma that
a lot of countries the main we have
climate change and we should do
something more like emerging economies
should do more to to to protect the
environment but some kind
does not mean so that's probably the one
the reason why we have the dilemma and I
remember one one once upon time I
interviewed a asper climate change as
per I asked him a very basic question if
I came here for a specific action for
what should i do tomorrow in the office
what do you think what would you suggest
and he asked me abandon the concrete and
embrace the bamboo or they would or the
log and but I just you know racing about
this question in some cities like New
York City that is where I grew up in New
York City we have it's a city full of
high-rises full of sooo full of crowd
knees but wait if it will change all the
high resident to day rude a lot that's
unimaginable but we do have some
successful cases like in Japan they have
a lot of houses made of wood frames or
their shrine or something so this is
like case-by-case like were you what you
said so my final question is like the
basic question again if I'm came here
for what I should do tomorrow in the
office what would you suggest it's
getting together with other people in
the office who feel like you it's much
easier to do things together than it is
on your own and you often feel like
you're on your own but there's always
somebody else who feels like you I
actually work with a lot of the big
companies like she'll and BP and large
developers and so on they only made up
of other people and there are always
people in those organizations to who
feel like you and who want change to
happen it's it's a system that's evolved
it's not what we think you know the
monsters at the top doing stuff we have
to kill them and all that you know we
have to evolve through this and we can
do it together and actually things move
quite fast when you get together
I mean look look look what you've done
look look at this look at this gorgeous
collection of people coming together and
this is happening all over the world
Paul Hawken did a review actually about
I think seven or eight years ago maybe a
bit more how many people involved in
environmental
collect action around the world and the
number that he and his teams eventually
assess about two billion people so one
in three you know and the Buddhists
always say it's alright it's not it's
said but it's fine if not everyone's
Buddhist as long as a third of us are
Buddhist we're fine and the world would
be okay there's a three point five
percent is a number being bandied around
at the moment if you've got three point
five percent of people doing stuff for
extinction activism to turn things
around that's okay as well so don't feel
small but get together with other people
make a big fish together and make new
make new narratives now because we live
in an anti utopian utopia at the moment
Margaret Thatcher one of her campaign
slogans was there is no alternative they
called her Tina there is no alternative
there's no alternative to economic
liberalism is what she said
that's an anti utopian statement that
says that we have to pragmatically live
in a broken world so what we need is
genuine utopianism news stories that
create whole new worlds that arise from
within collective narratives that can
change that narrative if we can break
that if we can break that apart we we
can begin to win
