welcome to the a a and yeah I'm very
excited that we have this talk here
today and I will try to keep my
introduction really short and really
brief because I think because of what we
have we aim to finish in 45 minutes and
then have take some questions the former
today was suggested by Brian even though
we we talked about having a lecture by
him and he said maybe that's not such a
good idea so we tried to do this as a
form of a dialogue and yes and see how
see how it goes
in terms of introducing Brian it's a
really difficult task and last time six
years ago when he came I think
embarrassed myself enough so I will try
to keep it really minimal most of you
know the work and are familiar with what
he does the other ones probably looked
it up online and the ones who just came
here to see what it's all about I think
you guys are in for a treat I think
that's the best Sun trying not to spoil
it but I think Brian is mostly known for
the music that he does or maybe I should
say the compositions or the melodies the
sounds the ambience I think the term
ambience or the the music or whatever
that is is a lot credited to him or
maybe the way we think about music has
changed because of that
I think ambience when I was thinking
about today is sort of the opposite of
entertainment and if that is to some
degree how we associate music to that
topic I think that's down to his
achievement of making us think about
this differently also I think the work
that he does which is not only in in
sound or music are also contribute to
that aspect of how we perceive the world
or the areas that we move in so a lot of
his other projects or maybe more recent
works are about objects and light
movement and color for example and and
these pieces are not only or purely for
entertainment in fact they actually are
some form of contribution to an existing
context
not unlike I guess any form of ambience
and I think that's a really generous
understanding of how we can contribute
to us or society or to the person you're
sitting next to so to some degree
they're plugins or a form of coda to the
existing world I think that's really a
special why I think it is so great that
he's here today and I think we should be
so grateful is that you know in an
environment like this or an educational
institution it's always difficult to
kind of think about what you should
become you know should you become the
next room or what what are we gonna do
and I think his trajectory is really
special because it seems that he's very
happy in what he's doing he goes to work
every day to his studio he does music
but he also I think studies there I
think he hosts events that are political
art related he likes to sing he has a
choir so these are things that to some
degree quite normal but I think they're
also very him
so maybe one thing that's really
fantastic is to aspire to become
yourself rather than you know some
amazing architect or I'm not sure what
one could become I know that sounds a
little bit esoteric but why not I think
in a world where everything is about
entertainment or stardom or the
individual I think it's worth to think
about alternatives and I think a lot of
his engagements and the things he does
strive towards that to think about you
know how do you feel about it and and
how does that relate to the rest of the
world nevertheless I'm gonna stop now
them so I'm extremely grateful that you
here again after six years I realized
actually that you've been here before
I think bernard tschumi invited here we
go and so it's it's just a continuous
journey and yes so thank you very much
for coming please join me in welcoming
Brian Eno
I guess you could say I'm a visiting
lecturer I just don't visit very often
but you lecture very much three times in
42 years yeah that's still quite
generous okay so I think we have this
list of topics that in no particular
order but in some form of relation we
could visit and we might not cover the
rule we might not cover the ball and
also the introduction was so long too
long and I'm not gonna talk very much
also so I'm just gonna try to be
sparring partner on the side but I think
we said we will start with with China
okay which is something that's pretty
much on top of the list okay well I've
had some surprising relationships with
China recently I'm a trustee for an NGO
called client earth which is a group of
lawyers who work with the environment
and who try to draft environmental
legislation and to try to get
governments to follow up on the things
they've signed up to and they also draft
legislation for other NGOs that don't
have their own legal wing so they're
based very near here actually there's
now I think 110 lawyers in client earth
working full time for much less than
they would get in the commercial sector
so they're good people
recently about three years ago the
Chinese government got in touch with us
and said to our founder who's a lawyer
called James Thornton said we're very
interested in what you're doing and we
have decided that we need about three
hundred and eighty environmental NGOs in
China can you please help us set them up
and James said to them but you do
understand the function of an
environmental NGO is to force the
government to do things it's to actually
contest the position of the government
normally and they said yes that's
exactly what we need them for so he
asked more questions about this and it
turned out that the Chinese had been
monitoring social media and had realized
that the biggest single cause of social
disharmony was pollution this was what
people were more upset by than anything
else and they used this term social
disharmony the thing that the government
really didn't want was social disharmony
so they monitor social media in order to
see signs of what's causing social
disharmony and they realized pollution
was a big problem
and they realized they had to fix the
problem now first of all you have to
realize that the Chinese government is a
government primarily of engineers rather
than a government of ideologues or
lawyers or businessman it's engineers
there's no problem there of convincing
them that there is such a thing as
climate change going on there's no
problem at all of convincing them that
it's something to do with us and the
solution to it should be something to do
with us there just isn't that background
of resistance that we see here they will
they absolutely want to solve this
problem and they want to solve it in the
most straightforward way which is by
employing the population as much as they
can to tell them where things are going
wrong so they wanted us to create 380
NGOs all over China they wanted us to
train 30 senior judges in environmental
law and 300 prosecutors James said but
you realize the prosecutors will be
taking you to court and they said yes
that's exactly what it's exactly what we
want them to do so this this was the
first revelation about China for me that
actually a government of engineers is
quite different from a government of
ideologues they're they're not actually
very ideological though of course we're
we're always being told that it's you
know the Communist Party so you're
expecting ideology they're actually
quite a lot more pragmatic in this
matter than any of our governments our
being with the possible exception of the
Norwegians I suppose who who are
incredibly enlightened people and should
be leading the world in everything any
Norwegian saying by the way I'm trying
to curry favor with the audience but I
won't work my way through various
nationalities as we talk but the second
thing I start to think about them so
there are what is 1.2 billion people in
China and of course there's a lot of
monitoring of social media and there's a
lot of control of social media as well
and control of the Internet in general
and I started thinking what what is the
possible future of a society like that
I've been discussing this with a friend
of mine called Kevin Kelly an American
who writes books about the future and he
says it's sort of an anathema to us to
imagine the society where that kind of
close monitoring and surveillance is a
standard part
public policy that you decide how to
behave entirely on the basis of doing
what Google and Facebook are doing when
they monitor your tastes and your
choices he says but is it better to have
a society where Google and Facebook are
doing their anyway and the government
gets what they choose to offer them or
is it better to have it as a systemic
function of government so we started
discussing this idea of future
government a possible type of future
government as the alternative to
democratic capitalism so-called both of
those words in inverted commas this sort
of surveillance communism which of
course as soon as you think of that you
think of the Stasi so you think that
sounds awful
but this experience with this lot going
on in the electronics here it's quite
exciting that this this experience with
seeing their relationship to this to
environmental problems made me think a
little bit differently about that and I
started to think that maybe that was
another model you know if you think
about it that if you am i on yeah so
every society sort of makes a chooses a
particular position between security and
freedom the most the maximally secure
society actually was some Russia in the
1970s perhaps it was incredibly secure
and very boring everybody had a job
because if you didn't have a job the
government would invent one for you and
you know any every artist survived
actually by getting a job where you
didn't have to do anything like most of
the artists I knew were janitors or it
meant they got a little warm room in the
basement of a building theoretically
tending the furnace the heater but they
would just sit and paint there all the
day but the government had to give them
a job because that was
commitment that kind of security was
very much a part of the Russian system
and it's also why it was so difficult
when that disappeared in the 90s a lot
of people weren't used to being insecure
on the other hand you have the freedom
type governments like America and of
course the the cost in that system of a
lot of individual freedom is a lot of
losers a lot of people who really don't
have any security at all probably about
thirty percent of the population I would
say are in in a very very dangerous
situation Laurie Anderson said to me
recently that 40% of Americans are one
broken arm away from total brain
bankruptcy the forty percent of
Americans have less than $500 in reserve
fifty percent of Americans can't afford
can't get a loan for the cheapest car
available in America so so you have
those two possibilities and every
society makes a sort of choice about
where they are on the axis and actually
people quite like security in fact very
often people prefer that to freedom
you've given the choice do you want
freedom with all its risks or do you
want security which is us here yeah vaa
because we're going through a process
that to some degree it's called
degree-awarding powers and where we kind
of we didn't have this kind of power
before which will give us more security
or how we used to run this where I mean
I guess the world has changed now where
we didn't need that and I think that
debate is is very much in the room at
the moment for us but I think what I was
gonna ask you about this do you think
that China is on to something do you
think they kind of getting somewhere
where we might actually
need to copy them or learn from them at
least consider what I think is
interesting is that is the idea of sort
of non-ideological government we could
really do with a bit of that I mean we
at the moment completely in the grip of
a of an ideological argument is already
out of date anyway so our governments
are pushing back and forth between two
positions that are both old out-of-date
so it doesn't really matter which one
wins they're both finished anyway you
know we have we have now the the big
argument of the 20th century was between
the idea of the individual and the idea
of the state who should who should be
the one driving change and that seems to
me already too too narrow and small an
argument there's a very nice book by a
woman called Kate Ray with called donut
economics in which she talks about there
shouldn't be just that polarity there
are two other poles that need to be
considered one of them is the household
that's to save the work that women do
and the other is the environment let's
say all the work of the planet that is
done without us having anything to do
with it except exploiting it so so it
has to be an argument at least as rich
as that really and at the moment we're
still stuck on this individual versus
state and have never succeeded in making
either of those poles work anyway
you know the individualistic society of
the USA is a failure a failure that had
many successes but in the end of failure
I think and even when it was working in
its most ideal form let's say in the
1950s or 60s when it seemed to be highly
productive and so on it actually
survived by having at its center
a huge command economy called the
defense industry so you have to think
about that because the defense industry
is really a way for a government to
divert taxpayers money into projects of
its own choosing some of those projects
turned out to be useful to all of us
like everything in your iPhone comes out
of the defense industry everything
everything I mean not just a little bit
of it but nearly everything in that
phone GPS contact communications on it
all comes out and DARPA so it was all
funded by American taxpayers which is
what makes it particularly sick that
Apple don't pay their taxes because they
are actually using they they were
founded on and have consistently used
taxpayers resources essentially to
create what they have and Google as well
this stuff all comes out of defense
spending and why is that it's because
free enterprise would not produce blue
sky research venture capitalists don't
back that the only people who back blue
sky research are governments or very
rich patrons sometimes the Medicis used
to back blue sky painting and you know a
few a few rich people back that kind of
research but systematic large-scale blue
sky research is done by governments this
is what marianna mezack otto the
economist is writing about that she
wrote a book called the entrepreneurial
state if you've if you've not read it
it's really worth reading
she's one of there are quite a few very
interesting new economists who are
writing about this anyway so so that
didn't even america in its most
theoretically market-oriented form
actually had at its center a communist
economy the command economy which was
called the defense industry and it was a
huge part and still is a huge part of
the business of America
conversely communism even in his sort of
Apex which wasn't at the same time had a
free-market fringe they knew they had to
trade and they knew they had to allow
some forms of capitalism
it wouldn't work otherwise so America
had socialism for the rich and still
does communism had free enterprise for
the rich and still does so whoever's at
the top of the pile gets to choose the
system they want you know socialism for
the rich is what happened when the banks
bailed out America in 2008 socialism for
the rich is when the profits are
privatized and the costs are socialized
which is what happened with Apple and
Google and so on anyway I wasn't gonna
make it to political vision talk today
is that well I think is not a bad idea
to keep that on the table to some degree
and because you know where to look if
all those systems failed or sort of
running out of ideas and China said some
tone on one side is there an alternative
way to get inspiration or some form of
yes so you know so something a trend
that's happening at the moment that
interests me a lot is is this idea of
politics not being done by politicians I
have three friends who none of them are
professional politicians in fact none of
them get paid for what they do they all
act as go-betweens for governments so
for instance one of them was just in
Korea in North Korea
representing the Dutch
Canadian and Japanese government who had
come up together with a kind of plan to
submit to North Korea about how we could
sort of gently step back from the
nuclear brink that we seem to be at they
of course couldn't present this
officially because it was shot to pieces
by the media because it looks like
compromise or appeasement or something
so it can't be done publicly so no
politicians can be involved in it so
they got in touch with my friend who has
a history of research into nuclear
weapons and nuclear policy and said
could you take this to North Koreans and
present it to them so we can have a
discussion with them about this and of
course we can't pay you because if we
pay you then you're prejudiced you're on
our side so he does that he he's just a
guy you know he's not a professional in
the sense he's he's supported by his
friends who think that what he does is
important I have another friend who's
doing the same thing in Israel at the
moment he's he's setting up meetings
between Hamas and some Israeli generals
completely under the radar no media know
about it and you start to rely haven't a
third friend who's doing the same thing
in South America in Mexico actually and
in Guatemala also so these are people
who are trusted go-betweens who are
trusted because they don't have an
agenda or an allegiance they just want
to make a situation better I don't know
if you saw that play called Oslo it's
unfortunately it's finished now it's a
it's a fantastic play it's about this
idea this this idea that there are some
things politicians simply aren't able to
do and this is really worse now than
ever
has been because we have 24-hour news
and so there always has to be something
to talk about and the best thing to talk
about are volatile things this is why
Trump gets so much airtime because he's
totally mad so it makes for good
television
and unfortunately that fuels the whole
cycle so anything that involves complex
or emotional issues like
israel-palestine like North Korea simply
can't be conducted in public anymore
it's just not possible because it's
immediately ramped up into a into a an
argument yeah into a fight
it's ramped up to the extent that nobody
is able to ever make a compromise
because then they get shot at by the
opposition parties in their own country
as being weak and appeasers and so on
it's nobody can actually talk about
these things in public anymore so in
some senses we've killed public politics
I don't know if you've ever spent time
with politicians they live in absolute
fear of tomorrow's Daily Mail yeah they
don't do anything they don't say
anything
in fact if Corbin dropped dead tomorrow
he would have already made a huge
contribution to political life in this
country by ignoring the press that was
possibly the most important thing he's
done he showed that you didn't have to
kiss their asses to do well I hope he
doesn't die tomorrow that
so so sorry
so I just I didn't finish answering that
question so I think the good news at the
moment is that politics is being done by
people more and more and and it's partly
because official politics has paralysed
itself it is in a state of paralysis
that symbolized perfectly by the
shutdown of the American government
yesterday so this makes you think okay
so who will be doing politics in the
future well it'll be us it'll be all of
us actually and I think okay how could
that work and this is why the top of my
list is ubi a universal basic income the
ever since I was a kid I've been aware
of the huge wastage of human
intelligence that we see around us and
and aware of how capricious is that some
people do well me for example I did
quite well given my working-class
background and when I thought about it
over the years why did it why did it
happen to me I wasn't that much brighter
than a lot of other people I knew and I
wasn't that much more ambitious or
anything but I had a number of lucky
breaks and they were nearly all to do
with social inventions of some kind one
of them was the National Health Service
which saved my life twice one of them
was free education one of them was a
scholarship I got a scholarship to a
Catholic grammar school because I have
passed the eleven plus and so they would
have they had two places in this school
every year for kids from for families
who'd passed the 11 plus
an entirely socialist idea that there
was something good about taking people
from a poor family and an idea
absolutely shat upon now but he our
current leaders who think that if you're
poor it's sort of your own fault and you
deserve what you get and then I went to
art school for five years also for free
then I left College not to become a
painter but to become a musician and I
spent a year and a half on the dole
there used to be this wonderful thing
called the dole which is where the
government would support you for a
little while until you figured out what
you wanted to do which they had already
been doing for five years for art school
anyway so I was the beneficiary of
somebody's somebody in the past
somebody's generous ideas somebody's
ideas that you couldn't just rely on
individuals to fight their way through
you had to help people a little bit
universal basic income is really a way
of saying the whole of us the whole of
society have created where we are now
it's not just a few smart people or a
few rich people we all somehow had a
part in this so why don't we all share
in the dividend of it it might be better
to call it a use Universal social
dividend or something like that say
let's all take part of the wealth that
we're generating because we are
generating such a vast amount of wealth
at the moment and it's going into us
smaller and smaller group of people
this isn't envy I mean I don't mind
people being very rich
I know six billionaires and they're all
pretty nice people I don't have anything
against them as people but I do think
that the single most dangerous thing for
any society is gross inequality and
I don't know if you know the book called
the spirit level hasn't really read that
don't read very much to you your
architects trajectory you have to read
more spirit level is by a woman called
Kate Ricketts and the guy whose name I
can't remember I'm so sorry it's it's
about inequality and it's about the idea
that inequality is not just a bad idea
for humanitarian reasons it's not just
because we don't feel good about it it's
actually a bad idea for all sorts of
reasons unequal societies have much
higher homicide rates unequal societies
have much higher rates of obesity and
body image problems there's some
beautiful research in there about how
these things relate to one another so
you think yeah inequality is not a
trivial issue it's not just a sort of
identity crisis or not just us being
kind in in taking pity on poor people
it's about a pragmatically functional
society it's about the kind of thinking
that I was talking about it's happening
in China now where you say the
philosophy what do we want to happen
here what do we want what kind of
society do want to be in where we don't
want to be in a society with social
disharmony our response to social
disharmony in America and in England in
particular those two countries is to say
let's build bigger walls
let's have stronger police forces let's
have longer prison sentences did you
know that a quarter of all the people in
prison in the world are in American
prisons
a quarter in fact it's 26 percent so
America which has 300 million people of
the 7.1 5% of the prisoners this is
clearly a psychotic response to a
problem we'll just lock them up rather
than will change any of the conditions
of the society we'll just lock lock them
up and put them away and of course
they're primarily poor people rich
people don't go to prison much in
America so coming back to I hope you
weren't expecting me to talk about
architecture week maybe we'll get there
sooner or later I think we do that
enough okay come back to universal basic
income
it's an incredibly ambitious idea and
very counterintuitive at first the idea
that everybody no matter how rich or
poor they are should get an amount of
money sufficient to stay alive if they
don't do anything else that's that's
what it means so you don't have to have
a job you might not live a fantastically
lush life but you will stay alive so the
idea is to to give everybody the basic
the minimum income that is needed to
stay alive now the conservative response
to that is a it's bad because people
ought to work so that's an interesting
discussion should they do do people have
to work do they not have value outside
of their profession and the second part
of the conservative response is well if
you give people money like that they'll
just sit in front of their televisions
consuming popcorn and everything will
grind to a halt so there have been some
experiments on ubi
and universally that is not what happens
people don't sit in front of their
televisions watching
eating popcorn they might do for a week
or so but then they get quite bored and
then they want to do something else and
in all the experiments with the ubi that
have happened so far three things have
happened in every single experiment the
absenteeism from work and truant ISM
from school decrease social engagement
increases so people start doing things
together that they weren't doing before
like hey we've got some time why don't
we rebuild the youth club or why don't
we get these potholes fixed in the road
and the third thing is the psychological
illnesses decrease very considerably in
fact the illness in general goes down so
in the places that is this has been
tried all of the hospitals have reported
decreasing attendances doctors report
prescribing less tranquilizers and
mood modifying drugs but of course none
of these has yet been done on a national
level Finland is doing a big experiment
at the moment but to me it's so clear
that people love being creative they
love it everybody loves doing it but
they have so few options to do it that
they either forget or nobody notices
that when they do you know I always used
to say you have to define art as
everything from Cezanne to cake
decoration it's all art some of us
decide to do it full-time for a living
but most of us do it in some way or
another in our normal life in choice of
clothes or haircuts or wallpaper or
paint colors or what
we we all have the capacity to act as
artists and to think of to think of our
lives creatively but we very few of us
have the time or the encouragement so by
art in under the rubric of artists I
include scientists as well who people
who have fiddling around with the world
in an interesting way - so if you want
to liberate the huge amount of social
intelligence that is needed to save the
world from the mess it's heading
for towards you really have to liberate
people you have to use the intelligence
of everybody everybody's got to be on
deck and able to contribute and you know
the few times that we've actually called
upon people in that way they've
responded quite brilliantly you talk to
anyone from my parents generation and
the time of their life that they
remember and treasure so much was the
Blitz now this was the time when Germany
dropped several hundred thousand tons of
bombs on London you wouldn't think that
that was a time that people would look
back to as a great time what they
remember apart from the horror of the
bombing was the thrill of communities
getting together helping each other and
doing things rebuilding doing all of the
things that humans love doing humans
love to care for each other humans love
to give love actually and they are so
few cake places where they can do it so
I have on this thing self grooming yes
if you look at all of our primate
relatives especially the bonobos they
spend up to 40% of their time touching
each other
grooming doing things to each other that
are pleasurable we are not very far
removed from those relatives and I think
we all want to do that and I think
actually one of the reasons for wanting
to talk to gossip to sing to people to
dance to to make things is is a form a
sublimation of that kind of grooming
instinct it's a way of doing something
for and with other people now what
happens when you atomized Society to the
extent that no significant communities
exist anymore what happens to the
grooming instinct you turn it in on
yourself and I have to say I can't help
thinking when I see these yummy mummies
in Notting Hill where I live with their
yoga mats and their little coffees I
think their self grooming all of the
love that they want to give to somebody
they can only give it to themselves they
haven't got anybody anywhere else to
give it there's no way of there's no
community in which to spread that as he
says I have a singing group every
Tuesday evening we meet to sing it's
some about 14 people and of the most
diverse backgrounds that you can imagine
there's a Senior Tax barrister we had a
boxer for a while and illustrator a
gardener me another musician most most
of the people aren't musicians it's a
group of people who would probably never
meet or work together in any other
circumstances singing together is
actually the most important thing in our
lives if for some reason I have to
like I'm out of the country it's really
sad everybody's very unhappy about it
and singing together really is a way of
exposing yourself to other people it's
quite vulnerable when you sing and at
the same time doing something that
requires all of you learn to cooperate
let go of some ego and become part of
something bigger this is also known as
love this kind of process so that that's
one way we do that and this this little
community I mean I would trust these
people with my life we we now have this
bond after doing this for many many
years that is precious well I think if
you had you be a universal basic income
you'd see little singing groups dancing
groups cooking groups children minding
groups teaching groups learning groups
you see them coming up everywhere right
now we can't do that you know if you
live in London you spend an hour getting
to work eight hours doing a job
that means nothing to anybody and our
getting home and then three hours
watching crap on television the worst
medium ever invented what can you expect
of people in those situations what how
can you expect creativity to come out of
there and amazingly it sometimes still
does you know that's the history of pop
music amazingly out of all this
creativity sometimes appears now we
almost know that can't be true
she's as you talk some really incredible
that's that's ridiculous
so now we have some time but I thought
we might pick can we just cross off the
ones I've done them no cheese we missed
all of that civilian poverty that
equality done that cellphone
self-proving done that you dear
well I think there's two things that I'm
really keen on that one is obviously
this thing here oh yes which I think
would be quite nice too yes I brought in
something that I thought I think this is
the most the most interesting
demonstration of complexity theories
that you could want as we need actually
somebody needs somebody Magdala client
yes that does a kid no answer so this is
this is a double pendulum you don't have
a little bit of sellotape or something
do you
I don't have to have that but I just I
just wanted to show you what a single
pendulum does first yeah yeah yeah good
- hey that's okay DARPA probably this is
this is a DARPA double pendulum okay so
everybody knows what a pendulum does
right quite uninteresting really
even if I do it quite hard it's still
quite uninteresting okay now I'm showing
you this because it's an it's an
instance complexity theory is something
I've been very interested in for a long
time and it's very much part of my
musical work which I've carefully not
talked about at all in this talk okay so
I've been looking for years for a good
example of how complexity theory works
and to try to make it intuitive to
people so complexity theory says that if
you stick together a number of simple
deterministic systems you get very very
complex effectively random resolves
chaotic results you cannot predict the
effect of sticking together these simple
deterministic systems so here we have
two simple deterministic systems two
pendulums now watch what happens if you
and if I do it again it will do
something completely different so this
to me is an an interesting example of
how our intuitions can be completely
wrong about things your intuition is
that a pendulum is simple another
pendulum is simple put the two together
and what you'll get is something pretty
simple what you get is something
extremely complex now I've been playing
with this thing for a few weeks now
and can you see how utterly weird that
is and it gets weirder and weirder the
more you think about it and the more you
look at it there's there's a whole field
of mathematics called cellular automata
which I could show you Parker but I
involve staking out my computer and
that's bound not to work so I probably
won't a cellular automata is a similar
idea that you create a little game which
has a few very simple rules easy for
anybody to understand and you hit play
and suddenly amazing things happen like
this so this is an example of simple
deterministic systems creating very
complex results this for me is this
summary of so many problems the problem
of intuition that we trust intuition
when we shouldn't the problem of
government that we think that if you
stick together simple systems you get a
simple system you don't you get a highly
complex one the problem of understanding
ecology is the same thing you put
together you an ecosystem is composed of
a lot of parts and you might think well
that part of is lizhen very important
you take that part out
that's what fertilizers do basically
fertilization is the idea that we know
which parts of the ecosystem are
important to grow plants it's a good
idea except we don't
and so we end up with exhausted soils
it's through not understanding the what
happens when you couple simple systems
so this little person here who I often
think of as a crazy dancer I also start
to think about human history and looking
at this what if this process that we're
seeing here was happening over a period
of a hundred thousand years so from the
moment I dropped this to the moment of
still represents the hundred thousand
years so what if a human lifespan is
just that much so we have our
assumptions about normality and about
what a human lifespan involves because
we think that we're part of a logical
system we think that we're part of a
single pendulum but we're not actually
we're part than not only a double
pendulum better end end to the end in
several dimensions pendulum so we we
keep making assumptions we keep basing
intuitions on the idea that one little
moment of this is normal it's not there
isn't a normal basically so if you
abandon this idea that there's a normal
then you're in very exciting new
territory this is why you need so much
intelligence to deal with it you can get
away with having a few hierarchical
leaders if you have a simple normal but
if you have a complex Louisville you
need constant intelligence I don't know
if you've been aware of what what is
going on lately in computing with alpha
zero and deep mind and those things
well I'm not going to tell you them
happening here in London here in London
the the world leading in them
well alpha zero is this project which
gave us the machine that beat the go
champion you know go is a very
complicated daemon game much harder than
chess much harder for computers to
understand alpha zero now has beaten the
world's best go players and it has done
it in a new way not by comparing and
absorbing other games of go that have
been played but by looking at the rules
and deciding on how to play that game by
itself and it's come up with strategies
that are beyond any strategies that
humans have ever used and they have a
very very counterintuitive I do it have
you ever played go I've watched it mmm
it's a it's a very peculiar game it's
all about implication and and alpha zero
has been making moves that have people
going that's ridiculous
that won't work so so we're moving into
a post intuitional phase I think that
doesn't mean that we abandon intuition
but it just means that we stopped
trusting it as much as you know artists
are very inclined to trust in to issue
I've stopped trusting it okay so
this is a very simple cellular automaton
called life it was invented by the
English mathematician John Horton Conway
in 1970 he's still alive wonderful guy
and it has a very simple set of rules
this we're looking now at one generation
one moment in the history of life and
the rule for what any of these squares
these many many squares is going to be
doing next is very simple if there's
zero or one adjacent squares that are
empty no sorry sorry I'll start that
again
cells will either live survive be born
or die given certain conditions if there
are three adjacent squares to your
square so for instance down there
there's got three adjacent live squares
that Square will be born in the next
generation so a lot of these are going
to be born you can see it and a lot of
those in there and a lot of those up
there and those up there if there's one
or fewer let's say one or zero live
squares adjacent to you you will die of
loneliness if there are too many squares
are jacent to you that's to say four or
more that are live you will also die of
overcrowding so that's the rules and
they're invariable in this so I'll just
step through this a generation at a time
ok now I'll make it go a bit faster so
so this is a sort of typical thing that
happens in life this this complexity
comes out of those simple rules now I'll
just show you
watch this one dies very quickly okay
I'll get I'll step through that so
exactly the same rules if I do it more
slowly you'll kind of see what's going
on now let me try a slight variation on
that I think this is different yeah so
the only difference between that other
one and this one is one single dot so
you see this one this one has quite a
long lifespan there are versions of this
that are called Methuselah versions
where things really last for a very very
long time and can you see these little -
have any of you seen this before life
yes good it's it's quite it's very well
known and it's it's justifiably well
known I think because it's so
counterintuitive you you simply cannot
predict what's going to happen you know
if I draw a line of dots like that ten
dots what do you think will happen let's
have a look I get what's effectively a
cycle like this it's an oscillator does
that mean a line is good so so you have
a little this little sort of organism
here that will carry on time and
memorial so no don't save it thank you
very much
now let me see what happens if I do one
dot less I don't actually know what will
happen here but let's see okay it very
quickly freezes so it'll stay like that
forever
because they've all got enough
neighbours to survive one of the rules
is that if you have two neighbors or
three you will survive so the the one
dot difference is the difference between
that and oh sorry
one dot I said let's stick to the rules
okay there's that's another variation
and now we go to the oscillator so
there's no way even if I've been playing
with these things for years and years
there is no mechanism in our minds that
equips us to deal with this kind of
synergistic complexity we just don't
know about it it's like we don't have a
I was sitting at a table recently in
Perimeter Institute in Waterloo Vale in
Canada and I'd been asked to come and
talk to the physicists there they're all
cosmologists working on quantum theory
and there was a lunch and they said well
is there one question you'd like to ask
us so there were 12 quantum physicists
and me at the table and I said do you
think there will ever come a time when
we will intuitively grasp quantum
physics in the way you intuitively grasp
arithmetic for example we know it's not
exotic to say that 3 & 3 makes 6 you
sort of get it if at a fundamental level
and we went round the table and only one
of them said he thought that his student
student students might be able to grasp
it as a felt truth rather than as a
mathematically derived truth and I think
that's sort of the way we are with a lot
of intuitive things to do with
complexity theory we've only just
recently discovered the complexity
science you know it grew out of
cybernetics then catastrophe theory
chaos theory then complexity theory
which is where we are now we've only
just started to realize that complexity
is different it's not just a question of
a change of quantity it's a quite a
change of quality when things become
highly complex and we don't have the
antenna to grasp lat that's why we need
so many of us working on it just like we
need alpha 0 level computing working on
the the amount of intelligence you need
to grasp and guide systems that are
highly complex like that not natural to
us they aren't the province of a single
human brain so they are either the
province of AI or of lots of human
brains and this is why we need universal
basic income we have to get all the
brains learned anyway so we have you did
I managed to cross anything else titled
that you the new metaphors of becoming
oh gosh that's a big subject well I'll
do a very quick version of it so just
pointer so the audience can see what
we're talking about so until about the
1850s the the English conception the
Enlightenment conception of how life was
organized was sort of a pyramid God was
at the top there then there was the
Englishman
[Music]
and then after that you'd have maybe the
Germans then dogs horses women the
French and then the rest of nature that
was that was the idea of how basically
things operated and of course all
intelligence flowed in that direction
nothing flowed back up that's
incidentally the way orchestras are
organized which is why I can hardly
listen to orchestral music because it
represents for me a theory of society
that I don't like
I sometimes enjoy it but I have to
pretend I don't know that all those
people are soaring away looking at bits
of paper well they're doing it um anyway
that's and armies traditional armies are
arranged that way as well
so this this axis here is an axis of all
sorts of things intelligence
disposability creativity what happy when
when Darwin came along
Darwin basically event invented ecology
he said actually things are very complex
li related to each other and actually
the complex things grow out of the
simple things now this is an absolute
bombshell to Victorian England because
of course God is the most complex thing
and everything else is less complex
because the intuitive grasp is to make
something complex you have to have
something more complex you know only a
more complex thing can make a less
complex thing so humans can build
airplanes because we have more complex
than the airplanes so
when Darwin comes along he says no
actually the complexity is the end
process of lots of simple things
operating together that was a complete
reversal and it was also the first idea
that nature and life were cross related
horizontally rather than parrot
pyramidal II is that the word like that
so this idea is still seeping through
and hasn't reached many of the southern
States of America yet but we'll get
there I I confidently predict by the end
of this century they know he there won't
be any creationist left in America or
here but this this idea of understanding
organization ecologically is also an
idea about how intelligence comes about
so we inherited that Victorian idea
about art and actually is still the idea
that holds true in art the art is great
men doing great things and then other
people do kind of less good versions of
them in the copies and the French do the
worst versions this sort of theory unit
so I remember going to a show at the
Barbican years ago my special interest
when I was a student was in Russian
painting from the early 20th century say
1906 to 1927 that period and I thought I
knew quite a lot about that I remember
going to this show which had about a
hundred and fifty artists from that
period in it 70 of whom I'd never heard
of and who were great there were lots of
fantastic works in there
and I thought how come I never heard
about those people you know I who spent
a lot of time studying Li the period and
it was just because history left them
out you know history writes about the
people who survive and carry on doing it
for long enough you know the Kandinsky
who kept putting out the pictures but
the conversation that gave rise to all
of that work including Kandinsky was
between all sorts of people and they
weren't all painters either they were
collectors they were sallow mists they
were girlfriends they were boyfriends
they were all sorts of people who made a
conversation together and I gave a I
thought of a name for this phenomenon I
called it seniors so we're used to the
idea of genius you know that there are
some people who have amazing thoughts in
their head but actually there are some
communities that have amazing thoughts
in their collective heads a lot of ideas
most ideas I say don't come out of one
mind they're articulated by one mind
very often but they are the drawing
together of ideas from all over the
place and technological possibilities
and philosophical notions and you know
whatever there's it's a whole rag bag of
stuff that goes to make if you start
reading about the history of science you
realize how completely happenstance is
how often things come about for this the
oddest accidental reasons and in art as
well so so I thought we needed this new
idea to recognize that scenes are in
themselves fruitful and some of them can
be intensely fruitful like some
Petersburg in 1913 and Paris in 1913
actually as well in fact the world in
1913
as always a bad sign when things get
really fruitful like that you're on the
edge of something yeah we're we're in a
dangerous situation right now and I
think that that arises from this intense
inequality coupled with intense
atomization this this loss of sense of
community it doesn't matter what
community is family is just as good
youth club trade union people really
want to be in groups I think and have
somehow created a situation now where
they hardly ever are so so that means
all the benefits of seniors are lost if
you're not in a scene all the benefits
of collective intelligence are wasted on
you and on that gloomy note we should
take some questions in a collective
scene at the moment yes and are there
thank you very much by the way for that
very long and here
is it off if you could say your name dat
what rich brain's rich balls do can you
hear that Brian anticipating your next
lecture anticipating your next lecture
here at the a a will be in 2025 can I
firstly thank you for everything you've
done for the culture of this country
it's just remarkable thank you you
mentioned surveillance societies
democratic capitalism
how about luxury communism if you are
and suggesting that human the human
condition is one as nothing more than
physical acquisition of materialism
would not luxury communism fit into your
matrix I pose the question it's a very
good question I like Lee I like the term
luxury communism
and there are some people who argue that
this that's where China is going that in
fact that the particular person I was
talked to Kevin Kelly who wrote this his
last book was called the inevitable it's
worth looking at though he is a bit of
an inevitable list in my opinion his his
idea was can we even can we who've grown
up in us in a political context that
very explicitly says that's not what
we're going to do we're about freedom of
the individual and we even think about
the idea of a highly surveillance
society and he says of course until
about 20 50 200 years ago everybody
lived in a highly surveillance society
if you think of tribal life you know one
of the things if you start reading
anthropology one of the things people
consistently complain about is everybody
knowing what they were doing all the
time and you know there's that Lou Reed
song where he says
the only good thing about being born in
a small town is that you're glad
to get out of there
source words to that effect so so this
this notion that surveillance is a whole
new thing is not true actually we can't
we came from a background of hundreds of
thousands of years of very close
surveillance so it might be that we are
not so such strangers to that idea and
it might be that it works quite well for
a lot of people I mean as far as I know
people who live in Singapore seem to be
as happy as people who live in London
but Singapore is a very highly
surveilled society and very highly
controlled on a sort of day to day my
new two-level so perhaps people are
happy to make their own particular
accommodation on the security freedom
line quite close to the security end I
don't know how much it would bother me
it's it's an interesting thought
experiment to think if I champion
freedom what do I actually use it for
what do I need all this freedom that I
claim to want and what do I do with it
I don't do very much with it really I
mean on I wouldn't be prevented doing
this in Singapore or luxury communist
China I wouldn't be present prevented
presumably making whatever kind of music
I want to make
hi my name is Vincenzo um you mentioned
the game of life and your interest in it
as well you mentioned darvon and the
evolution theory in which basically you
have a very basic origin and a clear set
of rules that leads over iteration to a
very unpredictable result result so see
a lot of interest in this so my question
is how do you relate this to the work of
an artist because it's usually and
usually people thought that the art
itself is a pure inspiration is pure
creation so how did you a DC and the
sort of influence in you thank you very
much for asking that question because I
shouldn't talk about music a little bit
so for the last 40 years or so I've been
working on an area that I called
generative music and that works a little
bit like that game of life thing I was
showing or a little bit like this
it works by trying to come up with a set
of rules now first of all let's remember
that all performed music is a set of
rules so this is not such a new idea
that you know the score is a set of
rules basically as a musical score is a
set of rules what I've been trying to do
is to think of musical systems which I
set up whose rules are tweakable and I
I'd let them play for me I make them I
make them I make them work so a very
simple example the simplest and the
first example I ever did was to have
three or four cycles running together
cycles that were not sync synchronized
to each other we could do a performance
of that right here we would get a little
piece of music that would be quite
unpredictable
you know if you if you make them if you
make one loop that's 3.1 seconds long
one loop this 3.75 seconds long and one
loop that's 4 point 1 3 6 whatever
seconds long and then you set them all
going let's say there's a significant
event in each other's lives over time
you will get every possible control many
many configurations so from a very
simple system like that you can generate
a piece of music in fact some of Steve
Reich's early music is very similar to
that in fact that's where I got the idea
from in the first place
credit where credit due he wrote he did
some tape pieces caught it's gonna rain
and another one could come out which
used to two pieces two loops of tape
running on recorder on players that were
playing a very slightly different speed
so gradually those loops eclipsed each
other in every different way so the
variety in the piece is as a result of
that kind of noir a effect musical
soiree effect so that's a very simple
example of generative music a very
another very simple example is wind
chimes where you you set something going
and it makes something that you would
not be able to predict now what's the
point of doing that the traditional
conception of composition is that
somebody like Beethoven walks around
with a symphony in his head and it's all
they're all ready and all he's got to do
is write it down and then how the people
can bring it into existence so
effectively the work is finished
in his head the conception of
architecture is the same effectively the
building is is done before it is built
most of the music I like is not done
before it's made it's in the doing that
the music appears so
I think of myself not as an architect
but as a gardener
you know if you make a garden if you
plant up a garden what you're really
doing is making a sort of something a
little bit like that you're you're
making a probabilistic structure which
will then continue and produce surprises
and do things you didn't expect and you
can of course tweak it and monitor it
but the garden will not come out like
you're drawing it's not like
architecture where you can draw it up
and get the you know get a nice sleep
the picture and that's what the thing is
gonna look like it's not like that at
all you except if you're if you're
gardening that you're working with and
always a garden is never finished a
friend of mine called Stewart Brand
wrote a book called how buildings learn
and one of the surprising observations
in that book he did a bit of research
and he asked a lot of architects do you
ever go back to the building's you've
made now you'd think that would be a
natural thing to do wouldn't you that
you'd think that architects would want
to find out how it worked you know that
was my idea now how did it work did
people like it today does it do its job
80% of the people he asked did not go
back to the buildings they made did not
ask questions about them didn't say to
the users do you like it do you find you
can do the kinds of things you wanted to
do here so I think generative art is
about saying I start a piece of work
classical art which I will put
architecture in now says I finish a
piece of work generative art is never
finished it's always in the process
of making itself can you do one or two
more questions yeah yeah hi hello hello
the lecture was fantastic I mean to
broaden the topic of architecture again
but you spoke a lot about this idea of I
guess data-driven aspect of viewing not
only like ourselves but also the ways
systems work and maybe governance works
and and the way that it's becoming yeah
like the way that we manage politics now
is becoming redundant in in the form
that you've described but then I wanted
to spin it back into the idea of like
yeah this this idea of never finished
that you spoke about like what if a
person is that I finished as well or
identity is never finished in terms of
citizenship or in terms of yeah who you
are so you spoke about AI systems being
basically capable now to do this formal
assessment technologically and in
regards to China since like in 2020
they're already planning to roll out a
system of citizenship credit rating I
mean I guess it would be interesting if
you could expand more on these notions
of what does that mean then for
surveillance when sort of trust becomes
there it's again like we're like in a
bigger village of constantly being
surveyed by a neighbor and you're
constantly putting up an appearance in
that case yeah Denmark is a little bit
like that by the way Denmark has the
highest rate of citizens informing on
each other
of any first world country look good
from the Germans though it's probably
but I should say by the way that this
kind of prediction about the future of
China is one that I have a lot of
misgivings about I I really don't know
what it would be like to live in a
society like that I'm just trying to do
the thought experiment of saying well
let's give it a try let's let's try it
out in our minds anyway because it's so
easily dismissed oh that would be
horrible totalitarianism but then on the
other hand I think well what have we got
now actually is it so great what we've
got now that we shouldn't be starting to
think of alternatives and in terms of
citizenship
I wouldn't feel very uncomfortable about
having a citizenship rating and my own
experience of what happens when you give
people ratings is that all sorts of
weird side effects happen so to give you
an example I was talking to an american
heart surgeon a little while ago at
dinner and he said well of course
everything's changed in heart surgery in
america since they decided to rate heart
surgeons so in america you can find a
published list which talks about each
surgeons survival rate basically how
many people survive the operations now
he said what do you think the effect of
that is and I said why don't I suppose
people try to go to the successful
surgeons more he said no the effect of
it is that surgeons who want to be
successful don't take on difficult cases
so at the top of the list are actually
the Cowardly surgeons
the surgeons who won't do the cases that
might fail so this is always the problem
with crediting systems and the same
thing has happened in the whole English
education system has been completely
ruined by what do they call it the
crediting system for schools leak tables
the league tables have absolutely
it all up because now what is absolutely
of primary importance to head teachers
especially in big cities is to be high
up in the league tables so that means
that you know you decide you want to
study biology and you haven't shown any
particular propensity in that area
they'll say no don't study that because
you are only gonna get a C in that and
that will make our league table rating
look bad so so they push people into
areas that they're already good at and
keep them out of areas that they would
want to experiment with so these these
notions of ratings have very complex
side effects that have to be thought
about and being engineers the Chinese
probably are thinking about that
Michael McNamara thank you very much for
asking people to read real books oh
that's a good book and in this one
apparently in the 70s you were in Berlin
with oblique strategies cards using with
with David Bowie and with with other
musicians yeah and in the talk you
mentioned their tuition in various
various systems did you are you
referring at all to Daniel Kahneman and
to Amos Tversky is Kahneman and Tversky
part of your discussion about intuition
and
and can you talk about those two things
the oblique strategies and the and
condiments yeah so when when I was doing
this I didn't know anything about karna
Minh these date from 1975 so that's a
long time ago but but I I know karna me
I've met karna Minh since not to ASCII
of course he died in that nineties I
think I just signed this pack for him so
so really this these came about because
I had noticed that when people are
working under pressure in recording
studios which used to be very expensive
no they're not because everybody has one
I've got one with me today in my
computer but what used to happen is that
under pressure people would forget all
their good ideas it was just like he got
to get something done got to get it
finished so I started making a list of
concepts that I didn't want to lose hold
off and the first one on the list was I
don't expect I'll find it but was
written as one of the ten commandments I
used to have it stuck up on the mixing
desk and it said honor thy error as a
hidden intention and this came about
because sometimes I'd go go home and
listen to a rough mix which I knew had
to crap guitar solo in it or something
like that
but when I went home I thought that's
actually pretty good
that's better than what I was thinking
of so that was the first card honor thy
errors of hidden intention and so there
are lots of different this this set grew
up over time to I I just noticed
ideas that I wanted to remember when I
was working and then I was very close
friends with a painter called Peter
Schmidt and it turned out he had a
notebook where he was writing down
similar ideas for his own work so we
decided to combine the ideas and made
this pack of cards which have been in
prints
then actually since 75 and have got all
over the place I it was at another
dinner humbly enough with a brain
surgeon a couple of years ago and he
said oh yes I know you're the only chef
who did those leek strategies aren't you
I said yes that's right he said gosh I
used those all the time and I was I was
remembering that one of these oblique
strategies said cutter vital connections
and another one says destroy everything
and this one you know and I thought I
said what hospital you have by the way
so so as as regards karna man to ask you
well karna man that that book is very
interesting because of the way it talks
about intuition intuition is fast and
inaccurate but it's fast sometimes you
need speed more than anything else and
that's that's the way I kind of regard
it I there's one thing I have to show
you it because it's very interesting
which i think is the most unintuitive of
all it's in my little book of
experiments in an intuition which I have
never published ok so here's a story
this is a victim Stein used to give this
story to his pupils imagine you know God
has just created the world he's very
pleased with it and he decides to give
it as a present to another God in
another universe so he wraps it in a
ribbon you know make it look nice and
then he realized he's cut the ribbon a
meter too long it's loose doesn't
look good it's loose on there so but
he's God you see so he can actually
command the ribbon to float evenly above
the surface of the earth all the way
around so so you have to imagine if this
is the surface of the earth there's this
ribbon that is absolutely evenly all the
way around above it the question is when
when the string the as 40,000 kilometers
around the earth so it's 40,000
kilometers at one meter long so how far
above the surface of the earth if you
already know the answer to this
don't shout out
it's by the way I just want people's
intuitive response to this how far above
the serfs were they of the earth will
that ribbon be assuming as evenly the
gap is evenly distributed over the whole
earth so it's one meter too long the
whole thing is 40,000 kilometers anyone
want to give me a kind of rough idea of
what they think it would be 1/4 1/4
millionth of a meter okay
any other thoughts just take oh come on
you're not robots take a guess
Christ okay
meters or centimeters oh yeah okay well
I should tell you the answer and you
won't believe me it's 15 centimeters
doesn't let's see me absolutely
ridiculously impossible when when I
first read that I thought that can't be
true and I stayed up a whole night and I
worked it out again and again and again
and what's interesting if I ask you the
same question
that God wanted to give football away
but the ribbon was a meter too long how
far off the surface do you think it
would be then so he's wrapping so then
it's actually 15 centimeters if it was
the size of this table and it's a meter
too long the ribbon what is it's 15
centimeters the increase in radius
doesn't depend on the absolute
circumference of the thing there's only
two variables oops
that's two PI R well two pi is a fixed
amount so if you increase C by X you
increase R by X over 2 pi it doesn't
matter what C is all that matters is the
increase and and those two are held
together in that relationship so this is
so counterintuitive that I'm sure all of
you are thinking he's making this up
I often believe it myself and I go back
and work out again anyway wouldn't it be
a nice book a book of things that were
completely unintuitive because there are
a lot of them I've got a few good
examples of this nerve things that just
you think that cannot be true yeah well
it the other one is the Monty Hall
paradox nobody believes that but I won't
go into it next next time in the 2025
talk we'll do the Monty hey
ok so I gotta go to the toilet what do
we have to say goodbye to you first so
thank you because obviously we are kind
of slightly delayed only kind of went so
quickly here so thank you so very much
for coming again and talking to us
things
[Applause]
thank you
