okay hi everyone and thank you for
staying for this concluding plenary of
the a xx 100 conference it's been such
an inspiring and thought-provoking few
days that I think I think this panel
will continue in that thread and end on
a similar note for this panel called
looking to the future we wanted to break
down the different boundaries between
academia and practice and talk about
what it means to be an architect today
and also to discuss solutions to ensure
that the profession becomes more
inclusive going forward also for the
session instead of having individual
presentations we wanted to prioritize
discussion so as you're getting a sneak
preview of everyone's work the slideshow
kind of operates with a will of its own
we're going to just talk amongst
ourselves and hopefully include all of
you but you can see some examples of the
work of our four panelists on the screen
simultaneously so around the table with
me today are four really inspiring women
all a graduates like myself I should
include and they've all gone on to do
incredibly different but equally
exciting things and I've been been
involved in the ax X approach a 100
project in a myriad of ways over the
years so to briefly introduce everyone
before we kick off the discussion as you
all probably know by now I'm Manisha
Varghese I'm the head of public program
and I also run a diploma unit here as
well as at Oxford Brookes Clem Blakemore
fair runs her own practice based in
London with an interest in the
relationship between design making in
place her projects include everything
from schools to pavilions and she was
the design museum designer in residence
in 2016 and has taught at the
architectural association visiting
school for six years
her first visiting school was set up on
her year out to build a school in India
so she's been doing that I think even
while still a student and she has a
background in sculpture and film and has
studied at Oxford the rural stir studio
of the AAA and RCA Clem was part of our
annual a xx 100 talk last year with
Farshid Moussavi and Sally Lewis it was
titled engaging generations and each of
them spoke about their experience to
date as well as like the particular
point of their career that they were at
at that point album Servilia lives and
works in London for the past several
years she's been engaging with current
housing struggles and is working towards
more inclusive socially and politically
engaged mode of design and she sees
london's architectural culture and its
inhabitants as the ultimate creative
battleground she's worked for MA and we
heard from Liza yesterday and she's
taught at the architectural department
of Newcastle University and from 2016 to
17 she was part of peach or alternative
regeneration team and we were setting up
a master plan led by the community in
Custom House knew him she currently
works for Caesar w/g architects and is
simultaneously pursuing her own projects
she's been part of a xx 100 for I think
nearly since the beginning and has
really helped us organize engaging
events to get more students involved and
excited about the project and she was
killed co-creator of the 21st century a
a graduate slide show that you can see
upstairs in the exhibition so Stephanie
Edwards
is an architect an urban designer she
studied at Central Saint Martin's before
receiving a Stephen Lawrence scholarship
to study at the AAA led by her passion
to affect change and fuel innovation
within the urban realm she's worked on
multi scale projects in the UK the
Middle East Africa South America and
China from strategic master planning to
regeneration engagement and the design
of single homes she's worked for
multiple practices including OMA Abba
Nouveau LCA wusu architects and isn't
currently at Barton Wilmore
and she's also recently been elected to
the RIBA Council and she was part of a
lecture series two years ago on the kind
of Stephen Lawrence legacy and how we
can challenge racism and celebrate
diversity and actually it was that panel
that inspired the session we heard on
Thursday on difference diversity and
discrimination so she's definitely made
her mark on the
x100 project and then marie-louise rao
otherwise known as Lisa raha
what's the Hertz on a de marr√≥n in Basel
and I liked how she described her bias
I'm going to read it by day she performs
in a precise and professional office
environment and by night she spends time
in her Atelier across the border in
Germany where she operates in a raw
industrial space surrounded by paint
plaster and marble so she graduated from
the AAA with a thesis titled eternal
Thamesmead and she was one of the
earliest student assistants involved in
the ax x100 project helping to organize
transcription workshops for our oral
history project and getting more and
more students excited and involved so
with all those introductions now out of
the way to kick off the conversation I
wanted to ask each of you when leaving
the AAA and entering practice what
surprised you most about the state of
the profession two years here so my
second and third year and made a
decision in my year out to not really
work for another practice and perhaps
slightly foolishly who cavalierly went
off to do these two projects in India
and started a studio in a very kind of
ad hoc way emerged so I guess I kind of
missed that experience of working in
practice and the sort of advantage of
that was being able to run at Maron our
own projects and build
very quickly my head worked a little bit
in practices sort of in summons
beforehand and then in might after the
ICA where I did my Master's I started
working for Doug and Morris and did that
for about nine months until this
opportunity came up for the Design
Museum and again it's a well time
slightly left a little bit prematurely
again so there hasn't been a huge amount
of sort of planning or structure but I
guess and opportunism and the way that
I've approached how my career
development so far but I think in my
time at Doug amorous there was a really
valuable insight into sort of more
conventional ways of working on
dimensional practices I think as a young
architect in a practice and I think I
mentioned this in the previous talk that
I did I found it quite hard to see how
you would get the experience or the type
of experience that I wanted because
there were lots of other people at the
same level or working on quite a large
projects and I do think that to get the
experience you need if you want to start
your own practice it's it's ideal to
work in a smaller practice as you want
we get more responsibility they yes I
first heard of a mix of and insights but
probably not into the industry as a
whole
yeah I think maybe less a surprise but
one challenge how to how you organize
maybe it's this idea of staying a night
or weekday and weekend that is quite
interesting so how do you maintain your
own interest the interest that have have
emerged during the time when you studied
at EA and that you continued to things
that you continue to be interesting how
you pursue those and at the same time
get this that's a professional
experience and once you start working
you kind of get totally into that but
then there are also these moments okay
there's all these other things that I
want to explore I want to get my hands
dirty I want to make things and how do
you organize your life and how do you
kind of live this almost schizophrenic
live for a period where you are equally
excited about both things because they
are very for me at least
maybe it's very different I worked for
two large practices I did an internship
at OMA and then since I graduated I work
for HTM in Basel and very large offices
international projects people come from
everywhere processes are really complex
you are a lot in the computer you make
models but it's like the complexity
versus let's say almost the the
simplicity or the the rawness of them
going across the border and just getting
my des
it's good it's quite nice but to find
the motivation because there's also
something ideal about this you know I'm
saying I'm doing this by night in my day
but often I get to 7 o'clock and the
reality is I'm not going over there
anymore so how do you how do you how do
you maintain that spirit you know how do
you how do how you keep doing dangerous
things
so how do you yeah how do you stay
focused on both ends is really a
challenge that I'm trying to master
somehow as I go along and I think from
my experience so at the AAA over the
five years you're really able to develop
your you know your principles of design
and you're able to develop your thesis
and what you care about and how you
develop that through projects and I
think the biggest challenge for me and
practice actually well now so I'm
working as a master planner or in urban
design so looking at architecture in a
much larger scale and it really is I
mean at the Angus there is quite diverse
in terms of you know people are from
different countries it's quite split
between men and women at the moment when
you work in the field of active design
and master planning it's not diverse at
all and it's really interesting to see
how you have these ideas of how to put
forward during your best practice and
but then you're actually faced you know
in a room that's actually surrounded by
filled with older men so for example in
practice I don't find it such an issue
in terms of architecture and design when
you're coming to the table and saying
okay we're designing that stamped
designing an urban extension the fights
that you have to have and only having
two women on the table or people of
color it's it's it's almost impossible
to see around the table how do you start
to look at those different needs and
wants in place so it's good to develop
design in terms of architecture at the
AAA
but in reality it's quite interesting
quite challenge as to how do you deal
with that how do you ensure that you
know your opinion is made you're
representing you know I can only
represent myself and my background but
there are a lot of other people on
table I think class is quite extremely
different you don't see that diversity
[Music]
disabilities it's just really
interesting I think because I'm looking
at a larger scale but there isn't really
that change or that everything really
that diversity in terms of age even on
the table so to me that's my main
challenge and also making my own
personal challenge it's when I walk in a
room and people surprise well yeah I
guess when your idea you have this
freedom for years to actually really
explore what you're interested in and
then you get out and you try to find a
job or something and I had for years a
great experience to work for math it was
fantastic it's not yaki could you do you
follow like great inspirational ideas
and I implemented in different ways
unusual I would say more conventional
practice and then after the diploma I
decided to go for more traditional
practice to do what it is and I'm still
there because I need to pay my rent and
I'm still doing you know lots of other
project on the site little bits is like
shifts between night and days and I have
to say really it's about being a cat
monkey during the day because this is
what it is when you only part two and
implementing someone else ideas and you
can bring all your smart ideas into it
but maybe you don't want to because you
want to keep your own mind and sort of
sanity for later for the project so the
way I'm dealing with it is by trying to
work with community not on it's all
related to housing and homes and stuff
but to do to try to create alternative
we are different way of practicing so
that actually it's more like autonomous
system where everybody's voice is
important in the discussion and
everybody's paid the same so I agreed to
work for community for 10 pounds an hour
so much less right there's all these
economics
I think which are very important in
London and then you are basically much
more slow so the idea of being slow and
it's okay to be slow and it may be
better then you know put in three
minutes a lecture a residential building
that's not gonna last me for the few so
basically I do have an understanding of
architecture as a little special
impediment of power relationship and
obviously in traditional practices to
talk about class race or gender it's not
even on the table so yeah I guess I
really enjoyed my nights my Saturdays
and well you know a Sunday doing really
different things and doing it
differently I think that's what's
important for me I guess like then that
brings me to the question of how do you
what are the strategies we can introduce
to prevent us having to constantly have
the schizophrenic existence between
weekend and weekday or at night and day
or what are the strategies to kind of
maybe bring more voices around a table
and making it make it more inclusive
like how do you start to break down that
boundary between your two worlds I mean
I guess just an extent having not
birthday for very long it for someone
else and having worked for yourself Clem
it's kind of interesting in how you very
much designed like your relationship
with all I definitely had that
schizophrenic period for a while because
I started a project in my fifth year
which was a small classroom
which I think at the beginning I was
sort of planning to do the whole thing
in the year as always grew and expanded
and slowed down and essentially I built
the first phase well not even by the end
of the academic year actually I did a
continued over the summer started
working for dr. Morris four days a week
and then on the fifth day we would go
back to my future and carry on building
so it was completely bizarre same
experience I sort of sitting at a desk
for four days and then putting on my
good side but I actually loved it I
loved that difference and then I kind of
paused on that project left dogged
morons to start my own practice and I'm
just sort of now starting to raise funds
for second base and do the planning
applications on sit have incredibly long
slow project but one that I actually
feels credibly passionately about and
I'm so happy that I'm still doing it but
how to sort of unify those two things I
mean I think so many practices that I
know of hafnium Bishop to be able to
accommodate the interests and passions
of their employees and love the idea of
everyone being able to bring them into
the office is such a nice idea
kind of forum to discuss what everyone's
doing outside of it
and the realities of practice is that
there's so little time and so much
pressure that sort of never seems to
happen so people have these other lives
going on but I don't I think they're
probably fewer I don't know how it would
work financially but if it has a
practice you could accommodate that sort
of in-house I mean I guess it could
begin with people presenting the work
that they're doing to the rest of the
author so Jack dr. Morris invites me to
do which is really nice so I had a
chance to kind of explain where I was on
this mystery birthday but you know if
there's if actually maybe it would be
really nice to encourage more people to
work four days a week and maybe keep
their desk space for them on the fifth
day so that the work that you're doing
could happen actually in the office I
think with the richness that the
practice might really benefit from that
but I guess it's just someone having a
visual interest to kind of facilitate
that
I'm sure this any people talk about
productivity in how service um statistic
I'm not sure this is actually the case
in architecture studios but that people
actually work three hours out of the
working day and spend their Facebook
whatever but I do wonder if that be an
inefficiency to have people work if they
had a fifth day to do something else
they would just get the rest done in
there for days I mean in your case this
dude do you think that if you were
allowed to have these two world combined
in some way do you think it would be
more complicated or beneficial actually
quite like the friction just did two
different personas somehow winging it I
don't know I mean these two sites it's
interesting because one one thing we
were doing is to maybe step out of these
worlds completely and we tried to get an
idea of basically like last year we
realized everybody who we studied with
and friends and they are scattered
around the globe but they're not really
talking to each other and there's like a
wealth of ideas and experiences and how
do you connect people back together
because we used to sit in the bar and
discuss everything but now everybody
lives somewhere else and you get the
occasional email but how do you kind of
bring it all back together to get like a
kind of like almost like a section
through everybody State of Mind so we me
and my boyfriend send 100 emails last
year and we called it the 100 minds and
we basically said we asked three
questions and we ask people to reply to
those questions and then those whoever
replied would receive all the other
answers and we asked what preoccupies
your mind right now how would you define
your daily encounter with the city and
can you describe the most vivid
Ariane's of space you had this year and
we waited three months and chased people
a couple of times and we got the 57
replies so it's like it was like a state
of state of mind of the time which was
really quite interesting to break this
silence amongst architects Anan
architect so it was also my dad
participating and people that are
studying medicine and people that work
in real estate so are not exclusive to
architecture but get an idea of what the
ideas about space and experience are and
what really concerns people at that
moment and time to dig into this pool so
weed it was like we were thought
collectors we saw it's just really
interesting and that it breaks down all
these boundaries between who should be
talking about architecture I think when
Lola was presenting in the previous
session she was talking about teaching
middle architect not to turn all
children into architects but to make
them to give them more agency or could
allow them to contribute more as they
grow up and whatever they become whether
they're working for a local authority or
you know I are a good client and I think
it's really interesting to think about
how everyone uses the city in different
ways and it could be a way another
strategy to to get everyone to I don't
know care more participate more in how
we design on city strange because now
before coming here it hit him with one
year in distance is very strange because
slightly outdated already again in a
nice way do you think you'd do it every
year maybe we do a second round I wonder
what could be the the next level because
mmm to send it to the same people with
other kinds of quest we thought we
launched at 99 problems but yeah I don't
know yet what the how the format could
be because maybe to send emails again
and get people to answer maybe it needs
to be a more physical physical thing
this means getting people around the
table or invite them to a strange place
I think there needs to be something
something more interactive this time
because this one was just in the email
inbox of everybody which was somehow
nice because it was very elusive yeah
maybe this could be a follow-up event
from the conference but um I guess
moving to Stephanie with what do you
think our potential strategy is to get
more people around that table or I don't
know break down the hierarchy of the old
men you know when you work in a practice
is very different from when you're
working someone's your own agenda and
haldi start to fuse the two
collaboration or have more collaborative
working with smaller practices and
larger practices and then how as a
collective see starts engage with
looking outside of the profession as
well as just within us and say for
example how do you actually create like
a meaningful engagement and I really
enjoyed you know what little architects
doing and I really like that idea that
they're not trying to make architects
but it's about understanding what we do
or influence we can have and that when
we do speak to people that are designing
for how we can actually understand what
they need so from I guess my perspective
in terms of what can we do I feel as if
we just need to be a bit more proactive
in terms of how we do things have more
time for meaningful engagement try and
get those people that never come out and
talk to you about what they want and
need how do you start to talk to them
understand there may be guys when
they're younger and
or try and break down that barrier
between waters within our institutions
architects and the rest of the world how
do you let's say have a conference like
this in a in a space that is you know
everyone can feel welcome to you and I
feel that you know raba councilman
Barron there's quite a few of us now who
are younger and different and hopefully
will make a change but sometimes it's
just about having those introductions
into different spaces and having
collaborations between people yeah but I
think collaboration is a really key word
I mean um and that it's a good segue to
move to Alvin because in all your slides
I was looking at them when you sent them
in and every collaborator you have is
listed on there and there's I think no
project that you've worked on
individually it's always with a group
and I think I think that's really
exciting I think so how I prefer to work
as well because there's always a
conversation and there's someone
challenging you as well it's not that
everyone I've collaborated with has
never always agreed with me and I think
that's the friction is what produces
great projects and I quite liked how you
documented that like how like drawings
become a tool to have a conversation as
does activism or and it comes at
different formats yeah yeah I guess you
yeah it's exactly that
I guess it's related to the way I'm
trying to practice or something like
that I guess I have always two
strategies at work
one is like drinks today to be slightly
discretely disobedience and I think it's
okay it's edgy code today to be cheating
right if you have that Trump there's a
mob la there is the sense of urgency in
actually been cheating cheating in your
daily practice and the other strategy is
a bit more constructive by actually
setting up very with not too much
preconception the idea that you can
actually collaborate with developers and
you can also try to move policy makers
or planners or even console and of
course it's extremely tiresome and
draining and
but when you have world community behind
you and the sense actually is their own
urgency about like look I'm being
evicted tomorrow I need your expertise
or this for that of for whatever and
that's we've been that's what we've been
doing at pitch for a year so it's pitch
people Alliance for Custom House and
it's a group of residence which is
living in the regeneration area of
Kennington custom house because cross
world is coming so the event is more
valuable and you have all these changes
at the moment in East London and they
actually on their own and with their
knowledge of organizing created a team
of 10 people with six organizer six
community organizer and four architect
and we really work together for a year
to try to come up with an alternative
that would reflect what people really
need but which would allow for proper
discussion and collaboration which means
finding a developer being realistic in
terms of financial viability and how do
you invest how do you make it work and
opening a dialogue with the concept that
most of you may know Newham is
particularly difficult and complicated
and after yeah I think it's a it should
be celebrated as a victory because they
now have a workshop every four six
months with the regeneration consular
officer so that's a massive win from you
know getting computer purchase order to
be evicted to actually be on the table
and try to implement all these things
and it was based on this idea that it
would always be exchange of knowledge
I'm an architect I'm supposed to know
but everything actually know nothing
anything so I'm happy to be there
spend some times with you know your
house is not how you did what you what
you're doing now what you need and in
actions you're gonna look at the plans
and how
thinking spatially and there was lots of
exchange and actually it's incredible
that at the at the end of the process
you could see that the community knew a
lot of planning terms like that we
really expert and I know now a custom
how I stacked my pockets I know where I
am at feel at home so I guess that's so
of course it's slow it's difficult it's
exploring ways of doing things that are
not so valued I would say but I think
it's very interesting and they're
they're pushing it further with a very
realistic sense because if you're about
to be evicted you're ready for comprise
right it's not about a dream it's about
making it work um I guess maybe it's
like a quest the final question for me
before I open it up to everybody else to
ask you all the questions um I wanted to
touch on something that hasn't really
come up across the last two days that
actually you mentioned when you were
talking about things that may set you
apart from the other people around the
table so we talked about I guess
differences in gender and race but we
haven't really talks about youth as a as
an issue and I think that that's
something that I've encountered a lot
although recently I've realized I've
been here quite for a few years now and
I'm no longer the youngest person who
works here but um I think it's something
that has always been an issue for me
like trying to get every time I come
down to the lecture hall to introduce a
lecture people ask me which year I'm
studying in and I think it's there's a
lot of positives that come with being a
young architect I think in terms of your
your less embedded in a kind of
entrenched system you can like break the
rules or cheat the system more or you
can find kind of new opportunities or
there's a certain flexibility that
allows you to operate in a kind of more
complex schizophrenic forms but there
are also disadvantages in terms of
getting people to take you seriously
while getting people to include you in
that discussion so I just wondered if
each of you could speak to what that's
been like for you
sort of more cautious and less confident
I'll try again I think that the reality
is that you for me I don't know if
anyone found this that I'm so much more
aware of how little I know when I
compare how I think about how I'm
practicing now compared to that year in
my year out when we awfully went instead
of building
I mean actively just had so little
understanding of what we were doing
really is that we just had so much
confidence so I do think there's a huge
advantage to sort of doing things and
starting things when you're young and
have that have that kind of blind
confidence I don't think I've ever I
don't know if I kind of recognized that
experience of not being taken seriously
I don't know if you feel I think yeah
I'm not sure I've ever experienced that
but in myself I can feel the shift I
guess it's a it's a it's a weird it's a
weird question for me as well because I
think this everyone rounds table has had
amazing opportunities that they've both
been given but also sought out and I
think I've like went before the panel
started Stephanie I were talking about
all these opportunities that we said yes
- and she's inadvertently running the
London office company and that they're
they're amazing kind of surprises and
you kind of say yes to everything and
then have to figure it out along the way
and I think that's also pretty exciting
but it's also a constantly kind of
struggle to to feel confident that you
know what you need to know in order to
do that job or fulfill what you think is
expected of you
interesting how and when you hear about
architects I mean will graduate in a
year in the 60s ending up designing huge
schemes alone at age 26 I think MIT has
definitely been a huge change in what
opportunity its young architects are
given but again I recognize that that
their ability to do that was probably
because they were so young that the
irony of not really experience but
having confidence like I think Alice's
when someone's kind of 24 or something
when they designed to hands down to the
school I could had only details but you
just constantly hear that and now it's
kind of expected that you may be late
thirties early forties but it kind of II
would do a project to that scale so I
think it has changed max I think there's
opportunity to ask very stupid questions
which I totally embrace because nobody
is blaming you because you anyway look
young
so I attend to an every meeting ask the
most maybe obvious or a simple question
because I feel like there's a especially
in a large of it there's a lot of
complexity and also maybe false
complexity people the way they describe
things make other people not understand
what they're talking about but it's just
accepted as such so I tend to then
expose this and just go really forward
and ask like how do you design this what
is the reasoning behind this or that and
how was this decision taken and usually
this is also respected as a practice I
good it's good to ask and important to
ask these questions and I feel like
being young and not so experienced is
totally yeah gives you do / - you can
embrace this asking questions and going
through it and really breaking down the
logic behind things and I enjoy that
it's really interesting that you say
okey but you say that because actually
the opening keynote of the conference
between Sadie Morgan and Samantha
hurting him they were talking about
exactly that like asking Orpheus
questions and Sadie was talking about
how she often asks the question that
she's worried will make her look stupid
but actually no one around the table
knows what
acronym stand for or like what these
complex like terminology means and it's
also a way to make architecture more
accessible for two years I thought they
they abbreviation off the project I was
working on it was the project name but
it was actually the partner in charge
they have the same letter but you get
kind of famous for its obvious questions
can you ask for me what it's good to
embrace that don't see it as a downside
no you do get more comfortable with what
you don't know you can I think I have on
parent sort of a moment of sheer panic
where it just seems completely
overwhelming and then you sort of
realize what actually it's gonna be like
this forever
yeah exactly for the first three months
of let's say the tractor I didn't do it
I have to once you signed up permanent
contract think it's also interesting to
see how you can use your it's almost
open up that door that a lot of people
feel they know nothing about so you know
you're young you know about this or
you're young you'll know about this and
it's actually quite interesting because
I feel like we are moving into a
different world and whether it's social
media or more tech advances that people
are more interested in that then you can
become the expert for or even if you're
not you know you know you have that you
have that you know extra but again I
think I've just yeah the same and do you
embrace that fact if you have a question
you can ask it because it's almost as if
- nuts you often hear the fear of like a
young women not being heard or not being
listened to but I actually think if you
just fold and keep you keep asking the
questions we keep getting experience I'm
just you know what you're doing I think
you will be hurt because you are just
have to be taken seriously you know your
 keep keep being persistent I I also
know that there are drawbacks to this
process and it's hard and you have to
endure but yeah it's a friend thing as
we said all those weird things that you
have to go through but just I feel like
it's part of that and I think yeah just
creates who you are it forms you and
shapes you none and allows you to also
be very clear than in the end because
you have fought for these things and you
have made lives experiences maybe this
is nice but at the moment this is mine
my state of mind yeah I've you know
letting brains there if I have a
different background actually it's a
positive because a lot of things you
know won't be spoken about just because
they don't have that experience and so
it's really important you do have people
different experiences that do speak up
when that's important and that you're
not afraid you don't fit into this mold
because you're never really going to fit
it and you can create your own thing
yeah I guess it's it's not always easy
to to speaker especially when you have
all the people on the panel and stuff
but when it happens I think always of
like because we had we had a chance to
have this great tutor here inaho at the
a and she made us look at Lina Bo Bardi
for a year and then for ya had in mind
what would Lena do if she had to choose
to make a design decision or whatever
and now when I am in like big big boring
meeting with planners or whatever I
think what would limit it and she would
actually be extremely bored and so maybe
not because you know and not like that
but it really helps me to think of her
and maybe uses like eternal use that
women are supposed to to have like never
any gray hair and whatever so yeah
what would Lena do is really something
that helps me a lot because you know she
had the second period so she was in
Italy for a while with her husbands and
stuff she did lots of stuff but wasn't
that visible as a woman designer at the
time and then they moved to Brazil and
there she I mean I'm sure it was
difficult but she really had an
incredible courage she really managed to
build stuff and so I guess you know
maybe she was much better than and she
was more bullpen oh I don't know why she
was bored all the time but that's I
think that's for me it's really great
that you said that because um I never I
haven't taught about this in a while but
with the first year when I started
teaching I said of teaching the year
after I graduated and I was trying to
pretend like I totally knew what I was
doing when I did that and actually the
whole time I said just think of my tutor
and I'm like what would she have done
I'll just do what she do and then over
time you figure out your own kind of
strategies and tools but it's a kind of
great way to build some initial
confidence by like calling on your your
heroes or your kind of spirit animal
well that now have said spirit animal um
maybe we can open it up to the audience
I've caught I've co-opted meridia to do
my usual job of passing the microphone
around so if you there's a question
hello thank you for I know this is
drawing to a close and it is very sad
because it's been great to see got a lot
of work and thoughtfulness throughout
these three days I have however a couple
of comments I will say and is they are
all related without question of how to
negotiate a lot of different issues that
we've been talking on the last one being
used and not that young if you want but
also I am interested in how to negotiate
the question of privilege within the
architectural profession in terms of
gender because we are sitting here I
love your comment I'm sorry your name
escapes me but you see thing in the
middle about these confidence maybe
could be held in future in a more open
space in able to for us to be drawing
different public's than public's like us
who are very privileged within the
architecture profession we've had
opportunity and opportunity is a huge
privilege so how do we negotiate within
ourselves as architects the fact that we
are privileged we are educated we have
opportunity and we are very aware of the
fact that many people don't and we want
to open space for a practice that
addresses those questions one comment
about youth I might be completely in the
wrong assumption but it seems to me that
you don't have children yet
well all of you yet and and the the
whole discussion about how to negotiate
between your own interests and their
interest and the reality of architecture
practice is going to change when you
have to face maternity and and and we
should be not only in terms of expenses
for children but you should be as young
professionals and and excited and eager
as you are thinking about the space that
you will have to construct in order to
be able to perform at the level in which
you are performing and and more when
your moms and and we are talking about
gender so I thought I brought that to
the table and I don't know what your
thoughts are on that spent about three
hours talking about this before it's
been yeah very bizarre process in the
last month or so for the first time in
my life form we're sort of unwinding
from work and that said you were still
like climbing a roof there's someone to
teach your visit he was close real and I
kind of complete semi plans that there
completely flexible you know I'm
planning to work three days a week when
I go back and planning to continue my
own practice but I really don't mind how
that's gonna pan out and I think I mean
I often I never have experienced
discrimination at work I never
experienced some other things that
people when they talk about women in
architecture but what I haven't really
seen are women 5-10 years who I can
identify with see a path for motherhood
there aren't that many around yeah just
yeah
um I guess I had a really interesting
conversation with Sarah Sarah from muff
who's there in the audience about how
one of the problems is that although
things there are more opportunities for
women today the profession has an
adaptive at all and there's not a lot of
a support structure for women who have
children which I mean of course having
children is a choice but if you do have
children there's a choice you have to
make sometimes between being able to
contribute as much as you want to your
practice or or someone else's practice
and be a good mother and I guess I found
that conversation really interesting in
terms of and maybe you can speak more to
that in terms of what are the ways that
we could adapt the profession so that it
actually has more of a support structure
for women that at the moment it's still
very much designed for men
and more to do with the welfare system
and society as a whole and the fact that
paternity leave isn't long enough and
maternity pay is too low and that their
societal problem was really rather
little once to do with any specific
profession but I do think yeah the
conversation that I had what I was kind
of trying to get at is that it's so
invisible the whole idea of having
children or taking maternity leave and
though it's just not visible within the
workplace it's but in architecture in
any workplace you don't see children you
don't hear about children when a woman's
pregnant she disappears
it's it and the whole work the whole
work environment itself for men and I
think as women we're being forced to fit
into a box that square when were around
so it's it's I think that needs to sort
of change fundamentally before and I
think the whole system just like it
needs to change like there needs to be
visibility for children and a space for
children otherwise there's no point
reading and Bonta batchelomez and early
states and and I guess he would be great
in meetings to have you know women with
their kids and it's gonna just disturb
the meeting a bit but it's all right at
the moment it's very very very separated
and I think it's a busy babies why not
you don't have like your one-year-old if
you want to have it at your meeting yeah
I think it's fantastic that this
question is brought up because the
history of women in architecture is
intimately linked to our home situations
and I my children have been with me at
conferences they fallen off benches when
I done panel debates and and you don't
say many men bringing kids like that
thing you don't see many women either
doing that and it's it's fraught with
problems and you know all of these
things I also wanted to highlight that
sometimes it seems there's a very short
time between being yeah I mean promising
and and older in your field and that
becomes new problems when you have very
senior positions and that's where some
of the power real power conflicts I feel
arise and and it's really important to
be empathic I think as communities
together both men and women and of
different generations to see what
happens and because there are there are
cracks is between us and there's
intersectionality by something but we
need to agree I think about rules of
engagements collectively and these
situations that we have now I think are
amazing for that because we we get to
this uncomfortable spaces and making
keep we can have hopefully other
dialogues and you'd be able to also
support generation space upwards on and
almost so to speak in sideways if those
new agreements come into play I think
it's really interesting
I think it's really good with talking
about this subject because and working
in practice I was told that you know do
as much as you can until your early
thirties because then after that you
won't have any energy or time but
essentially not saying you'll probably
have children and then nobody will give
you that energy and time and then you
know you're it's almost as if it's
interesting that you said no one talks
about it and not about maternity because
these people do disappear and then they
might come back at you know for three
days a week and you know one of the
somebody in our office was saying that
don't tell the client that you know they
don't work at this time and you never
see them in the office but they're
always on email and it just seems like a
very stressful type of relationship and
no one really tells you how to navigate
that we should be looking at how do you
thought ambitions and to move forward
without this break that is essentially
going to be the end of our career or you
know a really tense time to navigate
because men don't really talk about this
and it does definitely seem to afflict
the women or people seem that it will
yeah I guess I grew up with I was the
kid off the bench I grew up like this
and that's just the self understanding
my parents they are doctors and they
went to conferences and it just took me
everywhere and there was this
understanding I'm just a little kid in
the back doing the homework or not
there actually is a public program like
in unofficial kids club because there
are a lot of children that are repeat
attendees they probably they've attended
more symposia and lectures than some of
their students at the AAA yeah exactly
but I think I think it's actually quite
interesting because my favorite picture
actually from the last few days that was
shared on Instagram was a picture by
Catalina who teaches at Brighton of she
didn't know who it was but it's the
curator at the V&A Rory Hyde who brought
his daughter to like a whole day of the
conference and she just sat on his lap
and she took a nap in between and she
watched part of the conference she was I
mean she has obviously been a child who
goes to a lot of conference conferences
because she just was like part of the
audience it was terrific
um I just I had well one is a comment
really
to say that I I've had the privilege of
being the tutor of two of ela and then
I'm just just in awe of how you have
grown and moved on so I just feel like a
bit of a proud not mum but just yes I
say in awe and I know because of your
sort of impeccable behavior at behaving
badly and how you've learnt to do that
and I think that's a pretty good skill
actually in any place whether it's work
place home place anything
but I think how to manage that is a is a
very I don't know if the I don't know
whether you can maybe you can learn it I
think you can learn it and I think it's
about probably this difference of
experience and it's been touched on a
lot and I'm not sure it is a gender
thing particularly I know this is the
emphasis of of now but I think this
whole question of difference of
experience and how that is brought up
through education and valued it's the
value of that difference of experience
is something that that really we have to
work much harder it capturing I'm
obsessed at the moment with personal
statements that's my focus at the moment
because of much even younger people than
yourselves and those people that have
probably not a massive amount of
confidence yet but are very confident in
another way which is totally um
out of control in the best possible way
and how that that does not get squeezed
out in a personal statement that then
takes you onto an A in your education
which will completely blow your mind and
I think there's something there's work
to do there and it probably overlaps
into practice also it's how do you how
do you perform in an interview how do
you what is that it that immediate
interaction which sort of sets a level
playing field actually for a moment
actually this is how I'm gonna behave
here on in so get used to it and that's
of EDS I think there's value in that so
I just think you're all amazing models
of how that
could be done more and better and
differently so it's a congratulations
really sorry L else I'll share the mic
in a second I want to bring it back to
what you said that it's a larger
societal issue this idea of of kinda
having to negotiate in between children
or not children to have a career because
I think it's the question that all women
that would like to have kids think about
a lot especially after your 30s and I
think um that's kind of what I wanted to
talk in my presentation is that these
are actually societal issues that can
happen in in more times the projects
that I showed there was an organization
of Labor around for women to actually go
back or go into different types of
working environments so it is a
political project in an economical
project I mean you see for example Japan
and I don't know the policies in detail
but there are incentives for women to go
back to work and kind of support women
with with the caring of children in in
their workplaces etc so I think a little
bit of this is to think we don't have to
do it alone there needs to be an
infrastructure because you're bringing
up the citizens of the future and and
that should be supported by a larger
system I think more than a individual
effort in relation to a lot of the
things we've been talking about is the
London School of Architecture which is I
don't know if you know it but it's a
really interesting model of postgraduate
architectural education which is
embedded with practice so students work
part-time for the first year and then
study full-time
yeah but it's a kind of nomadic school
that's basically formed out of a network
or supportive practices in London and
it's completely it's had the sort of
status quo power education is delivered
it allows a much more diverse group of
students to study because of the sort of
ability to add while studying it's
brought in these converse this sort of
schizophrenia it's gonna harmonized
because students bring in their own
research into the practice so I think
it's and it's it has its flaws I think
it doesn't have for example at the a a
has which is the bar and this site I
kind of intensity of being together that
really revolutionize kind of how how
people operate and I always talk about
the fact that the Chengzhi I used to be
a crash why did that how is it that it
was more progressive and if everybody's
insurance it's how it's a failing of
society if you needed to have so many
more violent it's a question of money do
you think you needed to have more people
looking after kids teachers two kids
have to be higher and it became too
expensive so they stopped it but that's
you know that that there were so many
more female students who had babies
while studying for example in the
seventies so I think on one
really basic stuff like increasing the
bounty pay and on the other hand as as
young practitioners or even within a
practice demand that there are changes
small practical but inventive ways of
integrated way of living and working for
men and women I think I just want to
share some um possibly interconnected
thoughts one was the the value of other
lives and I think that relates as much
to making space for you know whatever
your other life might be whether it's a
child or your work and moff I have a
sense that people need some space which
isn't bringing their work into the
office you know there'd be a sense that
everything gets you know everything gets
consumed I know I consume it somebody
has some good work I get excited by it
and so time is properly of more value
than you know them being in the room
even though I always enjoy it when if
I've forgotten something come back that
weekend and people are making use of the
studio as their own space that feels
feels good number one just thinking of
the material was the CAD monkey and
wondering that you know you have that
knowledge of digital but Saudis just
given a robot citizenship and the robots
are made in the form of young women that
look a bit like you you know they never
have wrinkles and I think that is
interesting that in the in Oxford where
there's this extremely well-funded
department a future the future the big
future and it will eat fruit the whole
times they're trying to live forever and
they're gonna get frozen there's not a
not a single woman there and so there's
you know the a should be thinking about
this
the third going back to age is will all
stop once said to me if you don't make
it by your time you're 40 you'll never
make it
and I said I give myself at least three
years per child but um you know in this
terms of age and achievement and being
kind to your to your contemporaries of
giving the idea of you know when you're
supposed to make work I think that's
that's important and the last point is
money you know if you've got if
architects got paid more for what they
do you could save up to give yourself
multiple sabbaticals and that the point
is more women are going into
architecture just like publishing that
when the land and medicine when their
wages go down there's more women in a
profession so like you've got to you've
got to get angry you know your own value
I think the thing I want to say is you
know this is not the first time people
have experienced these problems there's
vast amounts of research this vast
amount of knowledge these are structural
circumstances they're not that
individual probably individual issues as
well but there's a lot of people who've
been before and found ways forward
there's a lot of people have been before
and found themselves excluded but one of
the things that we try to do is share
that knowledge so understand structural
circumstances understands yoshiya
knowledge between women and men of
different generations yes there's a lot
of crap and professional practice but
there's some really good models as well
so sharing or understanding about how
the practices that are working towards a
much more flexible workplace do it
effectively how they operate to have
meaningful part-time work in a way that
it's not you know you're not there is a
glorified student so there's a vast
amount of knowledge and this is why we
set up the paula Koster it could all
practice for example so that when you're
seven months pregnant you're not going
home we don't know how to do this but
that there is a whole lot of there's a
hot plethora of ways to proceed
strategically in Australia the data is
horrific you know there's fabulous you
know women's careers go like this until
30 and then they dive
now we don't tell people those
statistics to make them feel miserable
and terrible and give up but we tell
them those statistics to start trying to
strategize about how to proceed and I
think this the sense of it being a
collective endeavor where we might share
knowledge it's really important that you
don't feel that you don't know what's
going to happen well first I want to
just say how much I've been enjoying
this panel and hearing about all of your
work so I think it's really really
exciting thank you I've wanted to say
something about architectural culture
we've we've talked a lot about how
society needs to change to improve
things for women as architects but I
mean sometimes I say to people what did
I learn at architecture school I learned
how to do two all-nighters in a row and
to work and work and work to work at
weekends to work and I I think that and
I was listening to you and thinking my
god these are the seven-day weeks that
you're doing you know you do four days
in practice to earn money and then you
go and do three days for kind of either
for yourselves and you're kind of the
things that you're really engage with or
for social projects and I just think I I
think we need to ask questions about
that as well I don't think it's just it
I think it's a there's also a specific
issue to architecture which is something
to do about what you talked about about
other lives and that that makes when you
have children you don't have the space
for the the other things that you that
you're doing so how you and maybe that's
something that needs to start in
education as well with you know trying
you know trying to resist the
seven-day-a-week kind of work yeah
who said anything in the think I think
one conversation that I would really
like to hear is also a conversation
about femininity versus masculinity
somehow and and how how how you define
that I mean because it's I think it's a
kind of it's a question for me I was
telling Maria and another friend that
Mark Hughes of the Philosopher's talks
about how modernity has produced a kind
of culturally produced an idea of what
it is to be a woman there are certain
features that have come up that are now
associated with with femininity with
women and that actually what should he
predicts that in the future women will
become more masculine what if for
whatever that means I don't know that's
a very to debate what that means somehow
is difficult but he but he says it's
very actually a lot of the things that
have been produced as being feminine are
what men should actually hopefully we
can push the entire society somehow
towards the feminine so I mean I thought
it was interesting I thought it might be
an interesting
years actually have a couple of men on
the panel talk about feminine India talk
about femininity somehow yeah I mean
because III mean yeah no no no yeah but
I but I I mean just to say I get a
little I get a little bit of a sense
that there's a bit too much of a binary
happening in a way when I feel like the
the points that are being made about the
structural nature of the problem are
much more important somehow so I mean
myself being being American and being
raised in a situation where there is a
heavy push as a child to be masculine I
mean there's a there's an over and I
think the mass the masculinity the
culture of masculinity the culture of
patriarchy is the bigger issue because I
would love to be what I can in my own
minds I mean I hope not to push some
kind of stereotype of what 100e is but I
would love to be more feminine to feel
that I can be more feminine and my own
idea of what that is somehow so I mean I
think that's a I mean I think that's a
really interesting point and I um
actually a few years ago there was a
kind of symposium organized here by
somebody else on it was like celebrating
the anniversary of this ad issue on
women and architecture and there was a
kind of questionnaire passed around and
I remember a band saw the questionnaire
and she was just like is this even
relevant to people today it's all about
women versus men like is that even still
the discussion like isn't isn't it the
lack of these this binary understanding
that's kind of more relevant in
contemporary and that it's all about
qualities that everyone can embody as
opposed to I'm a woman and you're a man
and and I think that that was that
really just that statement the fact that
all the students that were kind of
helping at the conference were just
opposed to this questionnaire really I
mean and I was opposed to it too and I
only saw it on the day of the event but
it really throughout from then until now
it's always made me question everything
that we do as part of the ax x100
project that there's obviously a very
long historical discourse about this but
how do you keep it relevant and
contemporary
and I don't know everyone I guess of
course if it meant be super sporty fans
I have to discuss the construction you
you have to do it they construct your
masculinity and come up with something
different I mean we are performing every
minute right but I have to think as a
woman how am I gonna wear makeup today
or not for kids I don't like children
whatever and I think of course for men
they have also to deal with what is it
to be varied or whatever but I think
that's a bit of another topic and today
we are all a bit in between so there is
a systemic sort of things about binaries
when everybody's been maybe already
somewhere else
so yeah I'm not bringing any answers but
maybe more questions yeah sorry no I
didn't mean it
[Music]
[Music]
I can probably take just one more
question I think one answer to than this
it would be a progressive process not
sudden
silver bullet would be for men to be
more involved with childcare when I was
in East Sussex we had a woman's group
and we invited this was under Thatcher
the men the civil servant who was
responsible for women's issues to come
and talk to us and I said to him and to
this group generally that was the
disadvantage that women suffer in the
professional sphere will never be solved
until men and women get equal parental
leave as they have in Scandinavia and he
said oh no I couldn't countenance that I
would never recommend that and I said
why not he said for religious reasons
yeah so that's what we're up against
well um like every discussion across
these three days I think we always have
to cut it short just when it's getting
like interesting but also you know a bit
fiery but I just I guess to end I have I
wanted to say a few thank-yous first of
all to the amazing women who run the
table with me today but also to everyone
in the room for being here across these
three days and really being so generous
in terms of what you've shared with
everyone but also I it makes such a
difference to have an engaged audience
and the types of questions and the
provocations you're bringing up and it's
there's been an amazing energy from like
a minute one onwards and it hasn't died
down it's just gathered momentum so I
think I hope this is the first of many
more to come
I'd like to thank the conference Co
convener starting with serotonin and the
formalin Center without whom this would
have been a much less kind of rich and
exciting project and and then of course
Lin and Elizabeth who worked tirelessly
on this project over the years who have
gotten to know so well through all of
this and have put together I think I
realized over the last few days having
two people external to this kind of very
like insular world of the AAA to kind of
look look at it from a distance and has
really helped make it such a rich and
rigorous research project and I think
what's really exciting about it it's the
body of work you've put together and how
that's going to be there for generations
to come
to look at I think is really exciting
I'd also like to thank Samantha Harding
him and everyone at the AAA who just
been so supportive in making this
conference happen and I've who have you
know gone out of their way everyone from
our security teams who reset the room
between every session so our catering
teams that I think ahead of catering
Pascal has brought his twin daughters in
today to get them serve coffee and
pastries to everyone - pizza who is
dealt with every AV issue that has come
our way and has like work tirelessly to
collect everyone's presentations it
really wouldn't be possible without all
of them so I think that's really
important and I think finally to end I'd
like to thank the for first for a women
roots Winifred Gillian and Irene without
their pioneering vision we probably all
wouldn't be here so thank you
[Applause]
you
[Applause]
