hello is the mic sound clear I think so
too
okay thank you all for joining us
tonight for our very first session of
critical practice we would also like to
thank the school especially Ava and
Manny Jay for having confidence in our
initiative and sharing an enthusiasm for
it
I am aria Arab Shahi and together with
love DiMarco and Tobias enter discord we
have organized this series in search for
a proactive mode of practice the
critical practice series is a call to
reimagine the relationships between the
profession and the network of actors and
conditions that surround it together
with architects planners and economists
who are piloting new models for engaging
with the public real we will have an
open conversation about common
challenges and exemplary initiatives in
discovering ways to have a more nuanced
impact on the built environment we
unfold three themes that we believe have
their potential to redefine the future
role of the architect rethinking clients
which will happen tonight forms of
Alliance which will happen exactly two
weeks from today so we will see you
there and affording risk which happens
in term two so why did Lacroix Busia
play the double bass while presenting
his proposal for the Palace of the
Soviets in the picture or in other words
how can we break conventional boundaries
in the way we approach clients this
discussion will focus on challenging the
traditional client architect
relationship as well as alternative
economic models investigating ways to
include a wide range of stakeholders and
a greater diversity of users I will now
hand the session over to love DeMarco
who will introduce our guests and will
chair this conversation thank you hello
hello do you hear me hi and welcome
everyone my name is Slava DeMarco so
many of you were able to come tonight so
to kick this off straight away it is my
pleasure to introduce tonight's
excellent speakers each in different
ways through their practice we imagine
the relationship between us as clients
as as architects and our clients and
we've asked each of them to present a
project that establishes their position
or attitude and after this we will open
up the floor to to further discussion
debate between the participants
themselves and everyone else in the room
so at that point please feel free to to
just jump in and we'll hand you a
microphone straight away so I'll start
by introducing Peters women on your left
as the prettiest women works on the
convergence of space production and
spatial policy in 1998 he founded 51m
for a space producers in Brussels and
between 2010 and 2015 Peter enrolled at
Flemish state architect a public mandate
empowering architectures of policy
making practice he was my teacher here
at the architecture Association in 2015
16 and has been a guest professor at the
ETH Zurich and he's now a visiting
professor at the University of
Luxembourg since 2015
he practices and researches
architectural policy whispering at Crate
and next to Peter we have Georgia
Georgia manalo Paulo George is the
founding partner of a UI architecture
and professor of architecture and
experimental practice at the Bartlett
School of Architecture how projects
include school buildings public spaces
temporary buildings exhibitions and
installations Georgia co-curated the
Irish pavilion for the 2016 Venice
Biennale and is the author of the book
architectures of change published in
2013 and founder and editor of the
publication series Bartlett design
research folios and it's further my
pleasure to introduce Martin Gilliland
Martin is one of the founding members of
the browser space collective router and
it's unit master for the Diploma 18 unit
here at EA so Martin has previously
taught at tu Delft and a Columbia
University and curated 2013 Oslo
architecture in our way behind the green
door
rotor curated the OMA progress
exhibition at the Barbican as well as
the Belgian pavilion of the Venice
gnarlie of architecture in 2010 in 2012
brought to developed an online inventory
of salvaged building materials around
brussels called a Poly's and finally I'm
really happy to introduce John Smith
John's is a founding member of the
architecture collective assemble where
he's been working on projects at a range
of scales in Venice Liverpool and London
with clients including the University of
the Arts London and Goldsmith's
University jazz teaches intermediate
unit 7 here at the AAA and has
previously taught at the London School
of Architecture and University of
Westminster so let's put our hands
together for our speakers tonight thank
you I just realized that I'm blocking
the screen so just to indicate whether I
should shift or not and also I mean it's
I was counting on that screen so it's a
smaller screen so please I mean I'll try
to read out what's on the screen as well
it's called the unprimed client and it's
partially a speculation something I've
been working on for the last 22 years in
practice but also let's say 'la for the
last two years also trying to write a
certain theory about it so this lecture
in that sense or this statement in that
sense hopefully could help the
development of the concept of the un--
private client you see here a very small
booklet I just got three weeks ago as a
from a friend of mine Leo strife from
something fantastic we're making a book
together on the topic and Leo was so
kind to make me this booklet just to
urge me to finish the text so it's not
finished yet but let's try and I'll read
you the first paragraph of the text why
because it's also linked to this space
this Institute and I think it could be
interesting for the debate afterwards so
and it starts with a quote by mr. Gehry
one I can comply with one of the few
maybe but whether architecture is an art
if anything architecture is the art of
dealing with clients which i think is
kind of interesting
I have reached the point of no return
speaking is Ilias in galleys architect
77 years old the year is 2014 the venue
the architectural Association London
saying galas just delivered a two hour
lecture we're sitting there on 45 years
of architectural practice the second
tension between a wished for
architectural autonomy and a brutal
reality of political and economical
constraint is tangible throughout the
whole lecture and lamenting almost
wronged undertone seems unavoidable
during the closing Q&A the relationship
between the architect and the
architectural client is brought to the
fore and how to keep a project alive
despite clients this question was asked
by back then director Brad Steele so how
can you have an architectural project
despite the client as a reactions and
Gail is she shrugs and then uttered I
hate clients the audience chuckles but
in a way saying hey this was extremely
serious I said there is no way I can go
back to designing for clients
I will never design a house for a client
who wants an architect to do so unless
unless there is a contract demanding the
client to go to sleep and only wake up
when the house is finished
hilarity Sangay Liz is deadly serious as
if at the end of his intriguing yet
difficult career he finally found the
guts and even the gusto to kill off
perhaps the most essential partner in
architecture the clients saying hey
listen shoes I know I'm telling horrible
things especially to students who have
to learn to serve a client but I'm
incredibly allergic to this requirement
my clients are the students we work are
the students we work with and together
we define the brief we do projects that
are deemed to be unrealistic however
they only are so under the present
political conditions and especially this
last sentence deeming that a project
should be unrealistic under certain
political conditions then I I find
questionable and I want to challenge and
I'm actually also not agreeing with I do
think that to a certain extent you can
have through architectural practice you
can have an effect on political
conditions and I'll try to show you this
first some
let's say historical examples where I
intuitively feel that the clients and in
this case a deep-blue client financially
deep-blue client was actually I'm
privatized by the architect so we have
here miss Johnson and Phyllis Lambert
who for the sake of having a very
slender elegant building actually made
sure that the 1961 zoning zoning
requirements the zoning a resolution of
New York got changed so all of a sudden
public space became something which was
inscribed or potentially favored through
the zoning resolution in New York this
means that this project beyond its
architectural Absolut elegance actually
managed to do something beyond the
project itself so it actually had an
impact on policy which I find the
biggest quality of this project another
example much more maybe demure and soft
in its approach also soft in its
financing the Aldo Vanek playgrounds
which he built over a period of 40 years
in Amsterdam more than 700 projects and
where I feel that he actually also
managed to UM privatize the client
though this client was the city of
Amsterdam so it's a public lined but as
you know most of the public lines they
behave like private clients because
there should be return on investment all
those things so I feel here and again
has to be sort of developed but by
creating this long lasting program
almost in an artistic way Vanek managed
to really improve it as the city of
amsterdam to be discussed another in the
same kind of region like a tow vessel
1996 the Bordeaux region where they had
commissioned to embellish this square
and they had a budget to do so and they
said well not they asked the people
around the square they said the square
is fine and said we're not doing
anything so the architect refused to
actually design something and on the on
the contrary they said well the budget
which is available let's keep it and for
the next decades this will be the budget
to actually just maintain
the square which I think so doing
nothing in a way also I think as a
strategy in this case again to UM
privatize a public client who thought
maybe that every X years you have to
embellish you have to redo a square just
to keep the people happy so this um
private this idea of um private client
and the definition is not final yet but
so it's about either private or public
funds so anyway in could be both or
something in between provoking a kind of
maximized civil value or civil profit
this is not something new at the same
time this is not happening as often
enough I think at least in architectural
practice and just for the sake of this
evening I did a test a very quick test
of ten projects which were built from my
former practice of a period of ten years
time I'm not going to explain the
project but I mean very quickly there's
one where I know that we didn't manage
to UM privatize the client which in a
way is a failure and even to where I'm
doubting at the moment I think the other
ones but again this is a lecture in its
own right but so I'm revisiting also the
production of the last fifteen years in
that sense personal production to check
whether we managed to be successful on
the level of I'm privatizing and I'm
privatizing client also of course means
may be or could mean the UM private
class the young private architect but
what does that mean I'm private
architects I still feel today and I'm
making a voluntary kind of shortcut I
know I'm relying but you have this kind
of fake choice if you leave school to
either go in private practice and I
could have taken any kind of as Chris
condiment but I could have taken any
kind of office that features in vogue or
whatever this kind of Fountainhead like
fetishism of the private practice on the
other hands you see here this is from
the study of amo Public Works where they
analyzed work of anonymous silver civil
servants so people in a way who have no
name but they design really powerful
architecture within the public realm and
for public service so this too I think
there's something in the middle to be
found
that's at least a speculation and the
way and at the moment I'm trying to also
develop this idea of the um private
architect is true ghost writing so not
putting your name under a project which
is new to me as well I must admit and
the notion of policy whispering so
having an impact on political policy
which means by making an architecture
project not signing it still being able
to whisper in somebody's political ear
and hopefully they'll listen it's the
same thing as doing a competition I mean
it's the same kind of risk-taking
one out of five you win or you get a
kind of commission and I'm going to show
you one projects and the images are
blurred so it's not a fault in the
because it's under the radar so I can't
show you the image order the project but
please bear with me it's like two
minutes explanation this is a project
which is still going on started two
years ago where and it's for a city
Martin probably will know as we go along
which city it is but if you don't know
Belgium you don't know which city it is
somewhere in the north of Belgium they
have a big river they've been fighting
or asking themselves for the last one
that issue do we have a bridge I mean
it's the opposite of London in that
sense there's no connection between left
and right thing and instead of waiting
for and in the next competition or
whatever chance to as an architect to
profile yourself I decided to go
straight to the biggest promoter with a
model just not this model very small
model free of charge knocked on the door
unannounced said well I think we should
make this and by chance he got intrigued
he commissioned us to this is the client
he commissioned us to and I hope if you
zoom out too much that you don't
recognize because with the blurring if
you zoom out you start to recognize
people that's a risk and so we had a
session of three four months incredibly
generous in a way to work out a project
under the radar so again nothing
official paid decently played and
in this image the arms race this
potentially out of despair because
actually we weren't supposed to make
let's say a real architectural project
more kind of strategic project and we
were as lost as we were could have ever
been but I think it was a really
interesting experience so the idea was
to whisper into the ear of the promoter
the developer a project that he could do
of course and then the promoter would
whisper this into the ear of the mayor
that was the kind of strategy sketch and
then we made a huge like a three by
three model filling a whole room which
was a had the intention for the
developer to see the mayor for five
minutes without the architects or
without the design so we were not there
so it's kind of complete anonymous
because if we would have been there
knowing the mayor and knowing his
political affiliation the project would
never go through but even that I think
it's something interesting and then this
was done December 2006 seventeen one
month later and I'm sorry it's in Dutch
but it's a press clipping an important
one saying that should city eggs get a
bridge over River Wye and this the party
of the mayor put out is press clipping
because we had elections coming up so
there of course all kind of keen to to
communicate something and they said that
if we win if we keep majority this will
be an election promise which I think is
something so let's say from an
unsolicited project to be able to get to
this kind of written press clipping and
of course day one so this is three weeks
ago so at the moment so there will be a
project the strange things may be about
this kind of improve it client so we try
to UM privatize the hardcore developer
of course he is in there for its own
benefit at the same time I think short
cutting a lot of normal ways of either
competition or whatever Commission's I
think we regained some speed and we were
able to have again I mean at the moment
in Belgium there's this big
dilemma or even a scandal that some
mayor's would see projects under the
radar I think it's common practice
luckily or unfortunately so to make kind
of to have them kind of maximum take a
maximum advantage of that we know for
sure that we won't doing the final
project but preparing grounds so I mean
I think also that if you think about
where architecture could go should go I
think preparing grounds is a kind of
niche or not even a niche I think it's
as though which is completely uncharted
everybody's focused on the final product
or trying to make a final project I
highly believe in preparing grounds and
then that means you're not putting a
name under a project at least you make
sure that by making a shortcut that
after hundred years actually a real
project is happening so in that sense as
a conclusion the um private clients
becomes also with the unprotect and
definitions are still open at this stage
but hopefully this debate will help to
fill in the gaps thank you thank you
very much Tobias I'm here to talk as an
architect and also as an academic as a
design practitioner I ran a small
practice a why architects and as a
design tutor and researcher I'm based at
the Bartlett School of Architecture in
the first years of my academic career
and many times since then I have been
asked to write to produce papers
refereed papers to produce books and
this was the advice I was given when I
became a lecturer back in 2003 at the
Bartlett it was required
I consider the study of text and writing
part of one's architectural practice and
I like doing that but I felt that that
requirement took me out of practice out
of design practice for a couple of years
I consider myself an architect who is
primarily interested in design whether
this is interpretive whether this is
critical or propositional and whether
the work is drawn or built and I think
there are many many individuals like me
who might be in practice running their
own design studios or in universities
what I would like to see more is to see
my university and many architectural
schools across in Europe and across the
world to support us in this activity of
design and in this way to support our
profession and as I said I'm sure I'm
not alone in this many designers find
themselves absorbed either by academic
positions that do not let them practice
in any meaningful way and here I mean
again design practice and many of my
very talented students and perhaps there
are people here in the audience as they
finish and they graduate they end up in
huge practices because they find it
extremely hard to set up their own
studios and we all know the reasons and
the reasons tend to increase in in the
UK environment but elsewhere and in a
very profit driven city like London and
also other cities of course so the
question for me tonight is how can
universities help architectural
practices particularly in in their
Genesis and how can they support the
profession and directly the production
of the build environment I will show one
project from my practice and how I have
tried to advocate for our academic
systems
and in my position at the Bartlett
hoping that that might resonate some
kind of similarity with what other
people might be doing between 2008 and
2012 while I was revisiting my PhD in
order to ride architectures of chance I
was also having a young family and was
in the beginning of starting a by
architects with my partner Antony
Boulanger disappointed by the
competition having you as one that can
potentially lead to buildings and we
looked at potential projects at our
doctors that competitions are a
fantastic mechanism and we in Design
Studios very very very important and we
still do them the problem is that even
the chances to win them are not high and
even if you win them the likelihood of
having your building being built is
questionable so disappointed so this is
the building in our local neighborhood
which was totally unloved and falling
into parts and this is the interior of
the building it was a nursery and one
with lovely people running very diverse
very affordable and informal with a
magical life in its in pedagogical life
in its interior and a spectacular garden
into the outside with mature tall trees
that you you very rarely have for an
affordable nursery and very diverse
nursery in a city like London and our
kids were going to this nursery we knew
the staff we knew the neighbors so
rather than continuing with competitive
competitions we which are likely to
remain an unbuilt
either even if you win them we had at
the time I think were second a couple of
times on big international competitions
and we were very very frustrated as many
of us have been there so Antonia I
thought that we should try to do
something
this nursery which is not just next to
to our house so we galvanize the
community the local parents neighbors we
fundraised we did a feasibility study to
prove how unsuitable the existing
building was and we managed to get
government funding for for a new small
nursery in in that locality so we were
neighbors local parents trustees of the
nursery clients therefore architects
fundraisers we have multiple roles in
this the building is very simple and I'm
not going to do I'm going very quickly I
pass through a few of the I think I'm
blocking them but the plan is very very
simple and it's a small building but it
has a more complex geometry in its roof
this is so that it can accommodate north
to south orientation so that the
interior of the building works very well
as a space for playing and learning with
daylight so it has just that simple
twist and so what you see here are
they're strip roof roof windows which
run diagonally to the plan of the
building and here you see the interior
so the geometry materialized to a cross
laminated construction brings good
daylight dip it into the plan during the
winter months and blocks and desire
light in the summer so learning and
playing in this building in the interior
of this building feels like being
outside and the relation to the garden
is seamless so a series of vertical tree
if the vertical columns echo the
vertical the trees of the garden outside
so I'll pass through this very quickly
that's the relationship that the
building has to its public park so it
offers a long bench for common use
that's
not for use by the nursery but for use
by the local community this is the the
entrance to the building again I'm
trying to show the relationship to its
context and this is the the shared
garden of the building very much
co-produced with local parents with
materials that were donated by the
neighborhood and by the neighbors so
what is interesting for us in this
building is their relationship to the
park and its function as a pavilion to
the landscape the drug this drawing that
I'm showing here was done after the
building was built and the intention was
to show the story of the building and
the intention behind it in terms of how
it should work with the park what is
interesting for us now
the building was realized in 2003 is
that the the building has has initiated
a number of actions urban actions in the
park so the nearby playground has been
upgraded and the whole park feels much
more loved for and cared for but that's
the positive side of this project but
what does it design excellence and an
award-winning building due to its
neighborhood so on the positive side we
have the upgraded Park and a new
playground for the local community on
the negative side operations had to be
upgraded to match the quality of the
building the award-winning building and
our very lovely manager was fired
because he wasn't a very good
administrator but he's fantastic with
children and the whole demographics
around who attends the nursery now has
totally changed a new kind of parent
body is now attracted to the well design
building again quotation marks the
nursery has gradually become
farmer organized more ordered more
privileged and less diverse what has
happened to our practice since then I
mean I'm sorry I'm referring a little
bit or entirely to my practice but I
think it's a personal story that that
can be common with others and other
practices what has happened since then
we have done bit by bit small other
projects in the area and there are tiny
projects but perhaps when you put them
all together they might have some
meaningful influence in the community so
we've completed six school projects
three reasoned SLP residential projects
and an urban landscape proposal like
this one which when we propose a square
a public square in in the center of
Kansas town some of these are realized
and some of this and realized projects
but for me they're very important it's
our in our commitment and involvement
with that place trying to to to propose
or to materialize ideas and engaging
with local neighborhood forums the
council other designers the community so
I think it's an important activity this
is another school project which will
have just finished science lab for Alana
Palmer very quickly I'll pass I'll pass
three days
Camden School for Girls which is almost
finished and some residential work where
the Victorian typology becomes it opens
up into internal garden that an internal
patio now I want the main reason why
I've presented this is because I wanted
to show the role of my school and the
potential role of the University in
facilitating practices like mine and
projects like the ones I have shown the
a a perhaps is a little bit different in
this but the bottle belongs to
certs led University UCL and typically
refereed papers chapters and books would
be the accepted form of research what I
I have argued I had I had I took the
role of
director of research for a few years at
the Bartlett and what I tried to argue
is that design practice must be seen as
equally important to the practice of
writing or study or history and theory
so we produced a number of folios so
that the university could get financial
results because universities are funded
by National results bodies so the prop
so projects like the Montpelier
community nursery and many others nearly
40 projects were design projects are
more drawing some were buildings
somewhere urban proposals and they were
all submitted as research projects and
they were funded and and therefore the
Bartlett and UCL was funded on the basis
of these projects being seen as
vulnerable production of knowledge and
valuable research what we did after that
we created the barter design results
folios which is a web and online
platform which disseminates this work
far beyond the national research
mechanisms we have so the projects are
accessible online and what is important
for me is that this this platform
creates a link between university lead
discussions and practice interests and
direct links between the school and
design studios so when you go and click
on any of these you can click back to
the person's practice or you can click
to other projects
by the practice this is a temporary
project that I did as a by architects
and it was included also in our research
outputs now the word research I think is
quite a dubious
dubious term quite problematic and I
don't like myself very much using it but
but I we can use it creatively we can
use the university mechanisms in order
to get support for for design work so
universities are very much focused on
teaching I see practice and I have put
this purse here University in
relationship to practice universities
are focusing on teaching I think the
activity of learning is very fundamental
in someone's architectural practice so
it is it is crazy to not bring the two
together universities talk about study
and research and in architectural
practice we experiment we do live
testing every building in a sense every
proposal is a live experiment
universities talk about knowledge
production we are our focuses building
production the two are very very close
together so there's a double
contribution here I think once the two
come together and I think the
contribution of a project is a
contribution to the public to the place
where it is situated but it's also
contribution to our discipline to our
architectural field and I want to finish
with this project which is done by my
unit unit 17 and my students at the
Bartlett at the time the project was run
by my to teaching partners Neil McLaren
and MIT's kosumi the project was
entirely student-led fundraise by the
students built designed and built
I'm not going to describe it in detail
but what is interested is my partner
Neil the following year came up with the
idea of something that is very much at
the heart of our unit but we said that
the student is a protagonist in the
production of architecture and I want to
take that idea a little bit further
tonight and to say that the tutor is
also protagonist and inactive
practitioner and needs to be supported
in that journey and the university
should be an advocate an investor in
architecture a commissioner a
disseminator of architectural practice
and in this way the university needs to
do much more to innovate in in the
shaping of the city thank you thank you
thanks so maybe is this on yeah maybe at
this point it's interesting to tell you
what the brief was that we got we got a
brief to talk for five to seven minutes
so I'll be sticking to the brief seem to
be the exception and also I won't be
using images because quite frankly I
think that there is a culture of image
production in this school that is quite
suffocating and I decided to get out of
the arms race with with that regard so
this will be quite old school I'll be
looking at you and I'll be telling you a
few thoughts and the first one is this
quite problematic use of the term
architecture not just in the context of
this lecture but most in general and I
think it was quite well or the problem I
became very aware of the problem just a
few minutes ago where we started
referring to this group of people as US
architects
that it's a sort of a homogeneous field
of competences of demographics of
practices and so on so I think a number
of things need to be said about this
word architecture and I don't think it's
a word we should stop using at all or I
don't underestimate its its value I
think that we are just linguistically
confusing a number of things that
architecture means we can talk about it
as a discipline we can talk about it as
a profession which is not the same thing
we can talk about it as a degree we can
talk about it in in in many ways but by
mixing uncanny
these different meanings of architecture
basically you can conclude almost
anything because architecture is
everything that is built on the one side
but it's the 1% of projects that get
published on the other side and so this
jumps in skills and relevance and so on
make it very difficult to talk about
architecture so maybe to expand even
further this notion of architecture I I
realized that it's probably not helpful
with regards to the first point that I
was making
I think architects are only present I am
active in the field of demolition quite
recently over the last few years
every major demolition project is kind
of managed by an architect we just stop
calling them architects when they start
working for demolition company so that's
that's a kind of a very strange thing to
say that the field of architecture is
super expensive and so on but then when
people become mayor we don't call them
architects anymore when they become a
demolition contractor we don't call them
architects anymore the biggest
architecture firm in Belgium about 220
architects is actually a sub company of
the biggest supermarket chain so that
they could actually say well we are the
biggest architecture office in Belgium
we also sell some groceries then another
kind of thing point that is worth
mentioning is that well this sort of
unique form of training that
architecture supposedly is which
generates a sort of a coherent field or
a coherent set of ideas that all
architects share when we say that
architects need to raise to power have
more influence on policy and so on who
are we talking about are we talking
about Peters women or are we talking
about Patrick Schumacher which also
trained as an architect what kind of
architects do we think needs to be
closer to power do we think needs to be
more influential and so on I think also
the place is very important talking
about architecture in London and talking
about architecture in Brussels is really
not the same thing
Brussels is very very small we have
really no problem of reaching
politicians I don't think that has
there's a single good idea in our office
that hasn't reached the right ears at
the right moment so I I can imagine that
in London this is not the case but
geographically there are differences
within this field and and I think it's
typically a problem of a former world
power to think that the context that you
are living here or that is present here
must apply to the rest of the world I
don't think Kenya or China or wherever
outside of the London metropolis aim
problems as the ones that we are facing
here something different I refer to it
as Homo economicus there's this idea
that architects more than any other
profession are kind of strapped down by
the economic logics of their profession
like
we would like to do so many things but
economy our relationship with the client
there's so many things that are holding
us back because we are rational human
beings and we only do what we are paid
for well if this would be the case
childcare would totally be a catastrophe
if you look at how elderly houses are
organized these people are not doing
this for the money they are not choosing
the fastest track to the biggest career
and so on so why do we accept from
architects that this economic argument
is always the one that we should take
into account we accept of an office like
OMA to say we would love to do housing
there's just no money in it well there's
plenty of Architects that are doing
housing and social housing and so on on
one last point on architecture in
general is this this this scope of
responsibility if you do a facade in
let's say natural stone you're doing two
things at the same time you're digging a
hole in a mountain of white marble in
Carrara Italy
and you're making a facade one is
considered an architectural project the
other one is not it's a single action
that we split up in two rooms one can be
criticized the other cannot be and I
think that especially because
materiality those that are familiar with
our practice that water will know that
this is kind of like a spear point of
what we are talking about this is much
reality this transfer of materials from
one side of of the world to another
really makes clear the very very limited
thing the very limited comprehension we
have of the field of architecture I have
a few other points I don't know how far
I am okay so I think competitions are
highly problematic I understand what
they do in terms of renewal new word new
generations and so on but I think that
we need to understand that competition
especially a large one provokes a search
a certain need for a lot
more people in an office when you lose a
competition you fire people when you win
a competition you hire people and this
creates a sort of super Darwinian
environment in which reflection and
sharing of competences are building up a
speciality as an office it's very
problematic rotor is organized as a
co-op we have 25 workers 14 are
shareholders
none of them are equal have an equal
amount of shares but all shareholders
have one single vote so the acceptance
of new projects is done by the
shareholders and this makes that we are
systematically looking for projects or
venues or investments that do not force
us to hire and fire people all the time
because basically we would be hiring or
firing ourselves another point and
that's my last one is that I think also
when we speak about the problems that
the world is facing I think many of
these problems many of the key problems
are beyond the scale of architecture or
even beyond the scale of urbanism and I
think this is something we need to be be
aware of and it's it's a double thing
because it could be seen as a sort of a
message of don't make yourself illusions
just go to whatever is easy and you like
I think we have a lot of leverage that
we are not using for instance the
construction budget in any given country
is always like 10 20 percent of of GDP
Architects are part of organizing some
of these streams of the GDP so if you
just by prescribing a certain form of
local materials or whatever you create
jobs beyond the building side like
there's really very easy ways to have an
impact beyond the building side and I
that's just within my field of expertise
within my niche
we find that there are two very big
territories that are on X
so I just wanted to mention very quickly
and but I think it has been elaborated
on before I think design as a form of
research is is a very like you could
accept a commission for a client that
you would normally not work for because
it gives you access to a certain way of
thinking a certain logic that you cannot
understand if you are not on the inside
so we work with companies like brig in
France or with companies like like like
Prada because there's no way to
understand the economics behind it as
long as you don't engage with these
people and then a very last point is
also architecture as a form of memory in
a literal way the building's as a form
of memory but because it is such a slow
profession I think there is a sort of a
potential for architecture to be used as
a narrative device like things have not
always been like this this this
presumption that there are no
alternatives to the world that we are
living today architecture kind of Mixon
and a very is very easy to mobilize to
contradict these sort of statements
thank you
[Applause]
okay legible people hear me I think um
the Marcin is gonna like this I'm gonna
show loads of images and I'm not gonna
say anything nothing of content nothing
you're gonna walk away with
so I called my probably longer than
seven minute lecture after something
that somebody once said in a documentary
about us which has become a kind of
catchphrase in our office about the way
that we talk about ourselves but it's
also about the way that we talk about
our projects so I called it there is no
boss which is it so both describes us as
a practice there isn't a boss where we
operate as a collective making decisions
together but also in the way that we
aspire to work on projects we aspire to
work in a way collectively with
co-conspirators other bodies governments
local governments in order to make
projects I'm gonna talk about briefly
about a very old project which I don't
normally talk about but it's helpful in
kind of illuminating the way in which
our practice came about this is a cinema
in a petrol station we made eight years
ago in London and all the projects are
in London so it's helpful to to talk
about where they are but the reason I
guess I wanted to show it was because I
think it's a really good example of a
kind of amateur architectural practice
which is not one that we often talk
about and I think that it's interesting
to me to talk about how mature
architectural practice because my friend
and design theorist Stephen not talks
about the amateur as a place where
practice can can revive itself it can
find new forms of working new places new
kind of ways of doing things because it
sits outside of normal capitalist modes
of operation that the the kind of
inventor in their shed is able to do
things that one is not able to normally
do in the normal mode of practicing and
for us this was the kind of an amateur
project and so I don't think it is at
all a model for how projects could or
should be done but for us it was a space
in which we invented a practice in which
we invented a way of working in a way of
doing things where which was one where
we treated the architectural project
project as a holistic project from kind
of conceiving of the project through
kind of business development through
construction and running and
organizational development through to
the downs the kind of theatrics of
pulling up this curtain every night with
the kind of group of 16 of us and so
really for me it kind of forms what we
call assemble today and talk about two
other projects briefly within my
timeframe the second of which is this
project which is black horse workshop
this is in North London Walthamstow and
it's kind of a complex hybrid in
relation to how it kind of came about
and how its funded and who the client
was we developed this kind of idea for a
kind of library of tools a something
that was analogous to the library but
was full of kind of things that somebody
could use to operate in a DIY manner
taking inspiration from the kind of
Men's Shed movement so the kind of the
program originated with us we kind of
with this idea developed alliances with
our local authority and with the GLA in
order to produce this thing that became
a kind of institution a small
institution we kind of developed the
organization designed and built the
building and continued to be involved in
the form of kind of having to assemble
members on the board of this this kind
of company as it kind of long ago is
ongoing and it's this space for all
kinds of people to make things which is
as it happens something that we think is
very important way of engaging with the
world around you and so people can go
there whether they are an amateur or
whether they're a skilled professional
and make a piece of furniture and it's
just turned for and is home to all kinds
of different practitioners and people
who make things and then the last
project Lawrence talked about was
something that we kind of started
developing in 2011 in Stratford in East
London and we were helped by what became
the London legacy Development
Corporation the the public body
responsible for the
aftermath of the Olympic site in East
London to find a space in the kind of
hinterland of Olympic parks this is this
is it and this is kind of what it looks
like she's just slightly gross this kind
of old sign making workshop where they
used to make the kind of weather spin
signs about sausages and smoking and we
kind of took on this space and we tried
it as a kind of number of different
things we you know made pizza there and
that kind of thing but it evolved into a
work space through a kind of mixture of
economic necessity and experimentation
and relationship to our own practice and
on this sites we developed this
this building part funded by the LUNs
legacy Development Corporation part
funded by ourselves it was kind of
funded by the LDC as a prototype for
affordable workspace new builds
affordable works based on the Olympic
sites and so we were trying to develop
this thing that was super low build cost
but partly because we were also funding
it and we had this relationship to it
and we were funding it with the idea
that we would then kind of get the
rental income and we developed a kind of
a kind of system of nos system sorry
we developed this material facade these
kind of cement tiles built to ourselves
this is a quick history of the building
as it kind of evolves into a place
that's kind of used and loved and full
of tenants has this kind of one moment
of exuberance these kind of concrete
tiles that open out onto a kind of yard
which became something of a kind of
Instagram pilgrimage I used not not my
words somebody else's words and then we
sold it on a stage and website and do
somewhere else
because we were kicked off the site and
used the the process of having developed
those projects in order to find a new
home a new place to practice a new space
in which to make things do things to
work and for other people to work
alongside us thousand square meters 50
tenants all doing different things and
working alongside and cooperatively with
us so that's me
thank you
[Applause]
thank you very much and really
interesting positions to start with I
I'd like to take the opportunity to open
token discussion up to the rest of the
room and if there are any immediate
questions otherwise I have a few in mind
and Oscar Lou hi hey thanks everybody I
my question is kind of to do with the
clients perspective because notably
there is no hard-nosed hyper capitalist
client sitting on the panel
I'm not having I could dig at the
organizers but um because each of you
seems to have somehow taken on the role
of the client at some point whether it's
a form of self initiation or if it's you
know policy whispering or whatever it is
but there's no there's I haven't heard
the perspective let's say of the person
who maybe isn't sympathetic to all of
the problems and the you know
pathologies of architecture I just kind
of want to ask maybe each of you what
you would think the like the really
hardcore client would make of this
discussion whether they would have
sympathy for it or whether actually
we're having that we are having to in
effect construct a new code to talk to
them with almost like I with almost like
a secret agenda so that's kind of like
an open question by just kind of one
that what you all about that Thanks
the last one yeah I mean I guess we I
mean I hope that in a way to some extent
certainly some of the clients that we've
had more I guess traditional clients or
hard-nosed clients or however it was the
put it my actually I think kind of see
hope in the conversation that we've had
in as much as I think it's maybe more
their language than we might expect
because clients aren't like in a way
client is a it's a it's a problematic
term right because it others them and
actually people who fund buildings and
people who fund architecture and are
involved in the the kind of economics of
how architecture comes about are
interested in how architecture comes
about they are interested in this thing
they're interested in the same
conversations that we're having which
are about you know how you fund it how
you make that money travel further how
you how you bring kind of different
kinds of value into economies and so I'd
kind of I'd kind of question the premise
of your question which is that there's a
kind of duality there's like you know me
there I missed a nice guy like architect
developer you know or amateur rocket
developer and then there's like the big
bad client you know on the other end and
actually I think it's kind of a much
more continuous conversation I think I
think we're by embracing that I think we
can then better have a conversation with
those people I mean sorry hopefully now
by the by kind of badly articulating an
answer to my question everyone else has
have had time to think about a good
answer to your question I agree with him
one of the last whatsup emails that I
received from one of the people in this
table had to do with a client and a
client that actually we might find
problematic in some way it has to do
with maybe BP or maybe Saudi Arabia and
what we call problematic sources of
funding one of the most important
questions that we have right now within
the school is how do we how do we
establish lines ethical lines between
that money that comes through the doors
when we actually are in a very dear need
a financial support so my question to
you actually is that supporting and what
you were saying I think there are very
difficult clients clients that are not
just that easy so I would like maybe to
ask I don't know someone in the table
wants to answer and take that question
where do we stand as architects how many
degrees of separation do we feel
comfortable from problematic sources of
funding and when do we draw the line if
we have the freedom to act as architects
with our ideas and what not so just
dropping that so I recently sent a
message to someone that is in the room
about not accepting a commission for the
Chicago architecture biennale yeah now
on the basis that they made their main
sponsor is British Petroleum and the
exact answer that I got I I know you're
making me blush anyway that it was a
sort of a the insinuation was that there
was a form of opportunities to knit
opportunism in turning down this this
commission and I I think this is a very
valid point and I I think it's so valid
that we should maybe even embrace it as
a sort of a strategy let me explain that
if you are some sort of Bo yogurt
producer you cannot afford to kill your
market by having some form of I don't
know Oh G M found in in your yogurt it
would just kill your market from one day
to the other
however if you are like the cheapest
supermarket brand that really puts
forward its price people are kind of
expecting you to do things that they'd
rather not know about and so I think as
as architects we can choose what sort of
clientele we we favor
our clientele would not appreciate us
working with BP even if it passes
through the hands of the Chicago you
know and I think so yes there is a form
of opportunism in us turning down this
commission I also personally think that
training down commissions in as a form
of processed you can only do it when you
scream about it otherwise it's not a
form of protest so I I think it it's
sort of not only developing markets
alternative markets that are in a way
more ethical
then average I I think not only it's
something you need to do for your own
practice but I think it's also something
you need to do very vocally to make it
harder for others not to do it and and
and that's that's the position we took
on this particular case at the same time
I think at the same time I think there's
a potential danger of some moralism
sneaking into contemporary architecture
and be at the school and professional
whatever I mean nothing with holes you a
to screen your clients so for instance
we the former office we worked in
Albania the first thing we did was
screen the client and of course then
you're not sure either but still you
have some kind of first-rate reassurance
so nothing is withholding you to do this
I think it's also something ethical but
there is some kind of danger for kind of
sort of moralism phrases I find it a
pity that you don't accept the Chicago
biannual because you're as an office
smart enough to find a crack in the
system to be extremely critical and
saying no to it could be an option but I
think they're all even much more
interesting options that are now not
addressed I mean it's not about
either/or I mean and I'm also saying
well because it's BP yes I understand at
the same time I think it's a missed
opportunity if your daughter doesn't
accept this this invitation so again I
showed it at the beginning Seagram I
mean nice would have said no to Seagram
because it's a section not ethical I
think as a as a company but nevertheless
with this huge amount of money they
succeeded I think to do something much
bigger or much more importance than the
architectural project they had an impact
on the city where they're having private
public space as a kind of pub I mean
there are good and bad examples so it's
not a holy principle but still I find it
interesting if you could use a certain
critical masses for instance of budgets
private budgets to do something beyond
the architectural project and use the
architecture project as
means to have an impact on civil society
if let's say the architect or whatever
or the the designer at the table is
smart enough I think there's still a
completely uncharted field to be
discovered by the architecture
discipline and I personally I mean I
just moved schools I went to Luxembourg
so that's at some pretty hardcore
environments and with a very clear
scenario and agenda in mind so I can
tell you about it this may be in three
years time if I can't come back it's not
it's not as black and white as its
projected and again I think is a V
students I think it's a it's a hugely
dangerous to say well if there's big
money involved or whatever we don't do
it please nuance I would agree to this
that it's not black and white and I'll
try to answer to I think there are two
questions here the first is the hard
core
the first focuses on the hard core
client the other on the hard core funder
potential funder so for the client I am
sure in relationship to my practice
after with I can give an example so
after we finish this nursery in the
Montpellier community nursery we have
repeatedly been approached by companies
maybe they're coming from the US who are
interested in a new series of hundreds
of nurseries attack that will take over
the world they will take over the UK
they will take over Europe very focused
on branding the reality is we say no to
this kind of jobs but I think they also
say no to us so it's big it's becoming
very clear that after our first
conversations that these clients would
not like a way architects to work with
and we will not like them so in a way
it's not black and white
we may need the projects
know that they are not right and
actually we cannot even convince we
cannot convince them to change their
minds so it's a both they reject us we
reject them so it's a two a two way
process on the case of the funding my
experience from from UCL is quite
interesting and maybe it's my personal
interpretation there have been very
[Music]
important cases of financial support
from sources that could be called
unethical and I think that's my own
interpretation I'm not a hundred percent
sure but I think I pretty much know
quite quite well that place by now
I think UCL and the Bartlett's approach
is quite interesting because I would say
in many cases the Bartlett will accept
the money but will make the issue of
ethics an academic and research subject
in its own right so it will both accept
it and scrutinize it so maybe it replies
to your point of actually saying yes and
then scrutinize the subject from many
different points of view academic
research intellectual ethical and so I
know examples where colleagues had
strong disagreements about accepting
money from certain sources and UCL's
position or the final disposition was to
fund these researchers to do further
research on it
but this didn't stop them from accepting
the funds so accepting and scrutinizing
at the same time I think that in the in
the end you know it's it's about
estimating when you get into a
commission what sort of power
relationship
being with and through the Chicago
architecture biennale you cannot start a
meaningful conversation with British
Petroleum like there's no way you can be
in a powerful position to change like
even the color of one of their gas
stations there's no there's no form of
dialogue and so I would I would argue
that actually we made a contribution to
the Chicago BNL or three Anala
somebody should help me on that that
circle our contribution and it was
actually quite funny because it was
shared were all over and so all of a
sudden you have like a small Hungarian
offices that share that message I we
were saying yeah we will also not
participate because they were not
invited it's kind of nice to sometimes
also sometimes that's nothing right it's
saying that I won't participate I think
that's a very good move but I don't
think I think it would have been an
important Commission for us so sometimes
saying no you know in a very vocal ways
just it's just it is the project it is
imagine Martin it would be an extremely
important Commission for you you would
say no which you probably will do but we
say no to almost everything like a
really extremely important what could it
be
like the maybe I don't know I think it's
it's also at least say no the first time
you know then when they come back you
can I think there's this this typical
economy of architecture fascism and then
I'll pass the word there's this typical
economy where the offices are constantly
looking for more work we are not looking
for more work we quickly hire less
people than we are than we actually need
so we're constantly overbooked and we
have this D construction company which
is hugely labor intensive so if
anybody's boards you can always go clean
tiles
it's it's really not a problem and you
can come clean tiles if you want that's
not that's not a sir so we have we have
a sort of a reserve of work and and and
and so typically we don't feel like
getting more work okay so and that's
that's a situation that you can create
if you don't want to grow as an office
thank you I think we have a question at
the bank hi I'm Katherine
I'd like to ask a question following on
the comments you've made and so
regarding the fact that you should take
the money but scrutiny is one thing that
I find complicated to accept is that if
you scrutinize and understand that the
money's coming from a source you're not
agreeing with further on what happens
that for example every every
architectural practice or everybody that
would be a potential receiver of that
funding would mobilize themselves
collectively what would happen then
because we need to understand it if one
or minority of firms or groups refuse
that money and try to act vocally it'll
try and pass them a message but the end
is the collective action that matters
right my my answer on on accepting and
scrutinizing had to do with the academic
environment in particular not the
architectural practice because the
academic environment has many different
voices many different researchers and I
think UCL's approach and perhaps other
university inventors did the same are
responding to the differences to the
different researchers to the different
academics so some do want the money
because they the research they decide
that that's okay and others have a
problem with and and without and use
is supporting both communities those who
are who want the funds and those who
question the fans the the UCL enables
them to to practice what they want
I don't but personally in in practice I
would find the biggest for me the
biggest issue that relates to ethics is
that has happened to our architects and
probably other practices is when we are
asked to work for free I find or to to
participate in in so I'm changing a
little bit the subject but I think it's
different between the architectural
architectural practice and and and the
university they're two different animals
when organizations like the BBC or very
very very visible public organizations
who would approach you do to make a film
or to produce to produce a project and
everybody in that arrangement of actors
will be paid and will be covered but the
architect has no need to be to be paid
because the architect is offering is
gaining promotion for example I think
that undermines our discipline so I
would have I would say no to something
like that
for example thank you I think we have
another question over here maybe this is
changing the subject slightly but I
would I wanted to ask a question which
maybe bridges the two points that you
urea and Peter made so you told us about
the students as a protagonist and maybe
the university as a commissioner or an
advocate I mean I find that very
fascinating and how can that relate to
practice how can students or even
graduates how can the university relate
to graduates the recent graduates and
advocating and Peter told us about the
say unsolicited project
human knocking on doors which haven't
asked you to knock on their doors so I
wanted to hear your thoughts on maybe
bringing these two or merging these two
ideas of do you see a potential for
universities to give a mandate to the
graduates of the students to knock on
doors and use the credibility of the
school to propose something to people
who have not maybe thought about them as
designers I think universities do very
very little and the examples I showed
[Music]
they they have been successful because
of extreme kind of a weak wheel and and
going against the grain and volunteerism
by the students by the tutors I don't
think universities do enough in this
area at all so the point I was trying to
make is I want to argue for universities
to do to do more and I think there's an
interesting financial model for them
potentially I'm not an economist and I
cannot figure it out but I think there
must be a way of both supporting
supporting the production of
architectural knowledge through
supporting architectural practice and
but at the same time offering education
so I think that I think we're perhaps in
the beginning of this and maybe that the
crisis we have in education and in
professional practice might force
universities to think about the role in
a different way but I'd like to see to
see universities and architecture
schools to be investing in in good
designs and good buildings and to be
supporting their tutors and their
students in this up to now what the
bottle has done is to support us
photograph our buildings very well or
give us a little bit of a few funds to
do models and drawings it does very
little I think it's important but it's
just tiny
I think Matt's more has to be done my
take on an architectural education in
that sense may be very limited the sense
that I believe that from a certain age
onwards let's say third year students
are perfectly able to work in or within
real projects and for me real projects
are projects political projects or
policy whispering projects or where you
could have an impact on future policy
which means that I still have the
freedom to be very inventive at the same
time they also start to understand that
the idea of what I said earlier
preparing grounds is a extremely
important part of the job at least of an
architect I don't believe in accepting
it brief and then executing the brief I
think we have to work and this is not a
novelty but upstream so as soon as
possible and I also talk both here three
years ago this is something we tried to
install although we were still very
rocky but phrases in in in Luxemburg
we're doing this rather hardcore may I
say with a real political program for
aiming towards a near future Bauhaus you
know even hoping that and this is what
my hope that students can actually
continue with in the process and maybe
have real Commission's coming out of it
or doing supervising or whatever so I do
believe in the intimate relationship
between education and then going to a
certain market condition because it's
always everything even even if you're a
spectacle as you could think you are
you're still operating within a market
condition and this kind of continuum
from education towards let's say the
start of practice I think this is
completely lacking all over not here
Belgium whatever wherever you teach just
did two years it a huh
I mean I've never encountered such a
kind of island condition which is of
course fantastic at the same time it's
also very brutal once you you start to
leave school and it's perfectly possible
to have this kind of almost intimate
relationships with maybe powers that be
and then it's up to individuals to be as
ethical as possible but again you're not
holy so I think you have to as you go
along each time check whether something
is defendable or not that's part of the
practice as well thank you I think we
have another question from the audience
it's it's more like a reaction to other
questions I went to school in Paris
which is a political science school they
have a very interesting model for
example the fees you pay the fees
regarding you watch your parents income
so I think it's a really interesting
economical model for school and so it
means like if you don't have so much
money you don't pay that much we
searching think it's a really fair
system and the other points that I
really like with that school is there
for like 10 years right now implemented
professional units which means like you
have your course but when doing your
course you have the school neck
partnership with no constituency office
big English all municipalities regions
they hire clients and for every year
they propose like 10 10 research project
so it means like as we were students you
are in a group of 10 and you're working
in a professional condition the client
trusts you as a normal clients and then
the tickets start from 10000 euros to
like 50,000 euros so this kind of system
also helped to compensate the lack of
fees from like kind of proof students
late size but it's very interesting
because suddenly you're in fourth year
or five year and are you working as a
professional so it means for example you
can walk
which is a big energy provider they ask
you for consultancy studies and then you
go every month to a big tower in LA
dÃ©fense and you suddenly see like what
the client was EDF and also was like a
professional context so you dressed up
to go to these meetings you prepare to
go to these meetings and you really work
for them and it it's like between six
and nine months and sometimes it must
have decayed it's tasteless but
sometimes it just goes to a project so
for example when I was there we we did a
project in archives so it's more
municipality run Paris it went really
well and three years after we are still
working with them to develop like
developments by the inhabitants so I
think it's also really important to look
out of the architectural real don't see
that these kind of things already exist
and we can pick up a lot of good things
all around I would like to react
immediately if you allow me we have this
great system in Belgium it's called
public funding public education you
don't pay for school maybe a few hundred
euros that's really really something you
should look into I mean and then the
school can make partnerships with
companies of course and they do it on an
equal basis they don't have to force
students to accept conditions that they
would not accept as young professionals
they do not cannibalize the market of
their own professionals that they put on
the market I think what you are
describing is really a totally horrible
model I think a student should always
have the possibility of refusing the
brief of contradicting the brief and I
do not think this is possible
in a situation where the school is
receiving money from a private partner I
don't think because it's public is good
first of all I think we are also living
kind of Fantasma the public good really
and if you look at the history of a
public-private partnership it's always
been as you say can you believe by the
of it but it's just like I mean it's the
way it's going I mean I'm saying the
market never really exists actually so
if you I'm saying that inscription money
in in schools should be as low as
possible and should be stayed covered
that's one I secondly say that schools
should not cannibalize the market for
the young professionals that they that
they deliver the meaning that if a
student finishes school probably this
low competition low hanging fruit kind
of things are the things that they will
be looking for if the school takes over
that market by a kind of selling the
work of their student that means that
that work no longer exists for the
professionals that they put on the
market so I in the context of London in
the UK because because actually in
architecture education it's there is the
beginning to adopt these models these
models of like the practice lead or
practice focused education and I you
know it's becoming a kind of fashion you
know lots of institutions not this one
which is I guess say different others
but of seeking some way of I guess doing
what they would see is kind of
collapsing the division between practice
and and education and I think actually
Martin's criticism is very apt for that
and in my experience the ones that I've
seen you know it does create problems
you know this you know there are virtues
to it official but it does create
problems in as much as you you have a
kind of the the space in which you are
liberated to kind of think and dream and
like really push the possibilities of
who you are as a designer but also your
relationship to the world is limited by
the framework of the practice that is
you're involved with and kind of
mentoring you or structuring your
education and I in the context of
architecture I think that's that's quite
problematic well I don't think it's an
either/or question to be just I think if
it's one of the options available and
the whole scope of a school I think you
could I mean and then it's of course
it's your choice it's it's a free choice
also of a student to go there but again
I mean the imagination is a fantastic
thing but I mean don't over exaggerate
also the impact of it I mean a student
can perfectly blossom when restrictions
or even if the constrictions are
projected onto him or her and something
fantastic might come out of it and maybe
he or she learns to say no in a very
intelligent way during its dedication so
I'm a bit uncomfortable with the very
black and white type of discussion I
think it's it's much more nuanced again
if I look would look at the a a and I
hope in the near future that these kind
of possibilities are will be present or
for instance the fact that some students
who are interested in after five years
of hard study expensive study are
willing to to linger a bit longer or
being linked to a a that there is some
kind of facility offers some way or
another to be discussed because I mean
just to give you one example of my in
Brussels so the schooling the
architecture school in Brussels which is
nothing compared to this or to all the
other bigger Institute's but very dear
to me and I'm trying now at the moment
so recent five students who recently
graduated who almost browbone or for the
last five months have worked on a
project which is actually linked to the
school because it's actually
reconsidering the actual school building
although the Dean and vice dean are not
saying yes we'll just go ahead and
because we think it's necessary to have
a building which actually it's a very
very harsh neighborhood and at the same
at the moment it's it's a kind of it's a
complete ruin so I think it has to be
much more responsive to the
neighbourhood which means also that the
infrastructure has to be to a certain I
mean just to have a certain level so
with the students in a kind of very
proactive way which is and they just
made a huge model next Thursday were
going to present to Dean and vice dean
and my agenda for them in a way and
maybe slightly patronizing but is that
they will get the Commission to do this
building as a kind of first thing when
they can come out of school so no
competition I mean no democratic thing
because their five year really
interesting students they said yes to do
to work on it pro bono which already is
a first selection I mean
so did I mean and this is of course a
one-off but imagine if all schools would
foresee these kind of programs whether
they could be massively economic or
extremely idealistic I mean I don't care
to be honest as long as there's a range
available and that there's a choice
available and at the moment I dread a
bit the fact that schools still have a
very naive
position fees avi what's going to come
after the school I mean again we can
think of a hundred types of practices of
architecture that you could start to
venture into but still the way education
is less I'm not talking about this
school as such but I'm not aware at the
moment how how the school is organized
but I fitness tack Uppal of schools in
the recent past and I think it's purely
criminal to to allow for students to be
so naive in a way I mean it's nice for
them to have this moment at the same
time I don't think in this present
condition that you can continue on
having an educational system on that
kind of almost unethical level because
at a certain point you have to engage
with reality or with community or with
economy so
thank you I think this is a question
from the audience and then the response
from Georgia do you want the question of
the response first um perhaps a question
first Natalie oh that's okay should they
the energies it has to do I think with
the over the kind of the extent the
attention that the institutions and the
architecture schools are pay are paying
on on the role of the student and the
students relationship to practice I
think it's a little bit it has been over
discussed over exaggerated over into
such an extent it deviates from another
issue I think what schools would need to
do more in my opinion is to support
tutors if the if if the architecture
school or the university supports design
tutors and supports design practice so
that the practice continues to innovate
I think we are making far more progress
in our in how we progress our discipline
I think I would say that this whether
the students are linked to practice or
whether they they they they stayin in
their own world
I mean personally I think the division
between architectural education
architectural practice or some form of
division is positive I do I do think
that i do see students as practitioners
in some sense but i do like the fact
that they can construct projects in
their own terms rather than under a
particular practice i find that
relationship quite quite dangerous but
if they're Kotetsu school supports the
teaching agendas and the tutors and
suppose them to continue to practice
and only be in academics without
involved in design practice continue to
support the projects all the time and
through results funding anything we are
somewhere different because we both
support practice and teaching thank you
I think we have time for just one last
question and then I think it's time to
run that my boy it's funny the school
was created as a reaction of
professionalization of of Education in a
time in which architects could only gain
a degree by actually working with
someone and and those architects write
an eighteen year old and a 23 year old
they realize that they need to find a
safe space in which ideas could redefine
the way in which architecture was
practice define and and and so forth so
somehow these school has always been
that space in which architectural
practice is to be questioned and rather
fine that is not to say that as part of
the unit collection that we do have we
actually do have one you need that is
doing a project in Paris that is a real
competition in which people are going to
be engaging with that total realistic
context without submitting the
competition on anyone participating but
as a way to actually give someone the
possibility of the experience as an
educational framework to actually
understand that reality that is a social
political economical context that thing
is part of what is that that we need to
do as a school but still I think the
proportion of that space of radical
reinvention is what defines and
constitutes the essence of this place
now on Thursday we have a conversation
in this very same room with alumni with
people who graduated and somehow I also
invite everyone in this room because
everyone in some future will be part of
that and and when we just came down like
what did we talk at the corridor right
we just said we had that membership room
we wanted to make I want to make it and
incubate or a laboratory a space in
which when people just graduate can
start organizing themselves among
themselves or collaboration with other
individuals to start producing forms of
practice
that do not require of the usual client
a government competition a framework so
the answer is is yes to all those things
and and and yet they have like how does
a school allow and facilitate the idea
of practice for their academic staff
beyond the space of the studio in the
unit I think that's a very interesting
question and one that has not been
problematized enough and question enough
today I was asking someone as it did
every single unit is - do you always
have a space and they said there was a
time in which the offices of the unit
hitters were inside the unit teaching
spaces right the office and the unit of
space was one and the same
then everyone lost their space then and
so on and so forth so I think there is a
conflation of those two spaces but I
like to think that that this room in a
certain way it should be also is a form
of practice know the ways discussions
lectures have become a form of practice
but so it's and this is just the form to
somehow not ask a question but who
actually respond to some of those issues
and I actually find it highly
problematic that when one receives
problematic sources of funding one
moreover has to spend the time of doing
the research on that problematic source
of funding because this is like Andy
Warhol I want people to talk about me
even if badly no like you keep on
perpetuating the presence so if you have
if you are have problematic sources of
funding given to me as long as I'm free
I'm going to actually make sure that I
have a very clear like blinding wall so
that I think I can use that funding to
really do what I think we should be
doing with that but but but they think
that that's for me a very interesting
conversation that is not on the clients
that is maybe unlike capital that and I
don't think should jeopardize this panel
but but maybe that what we will do over
drinks later on when that continues
thank you I think on that note that
we're reaching the end of tonight's
conversation it's a conversation that we
could keep on having then that I hope
that we will keep on having and
I just like to thank jails Martin
Georgia and Peter for being here tonight
and thank all of you for coming and
listening in are some questions and I
also want to remind you that
was the first in a series of three
conversations the next one is exactly in
two weeks from now where we've were
welcoming fin Williams and pooja Agarwal
are no Brando looper and freak person to
join the table on the conversation of
alliances and so please join me in
thanking the panel and I wish
[Applause]
