you
very excited to have Michael moulton
hair for this evening's lecture I just
wanted to start by welcoming everyone
and thank you Liam O'Brien who curated
this lecture series called the
architecture in its orbits really
thinking through whether at this moment
the discipline has a center of gravity
or in fact there are many peripheral
movements collisions actually happening
to create some illusion of the center of
gravity so tonight I asked impassioned
giggly introduction because i heard that
hashem was roommates with Michael
Mauldin ethinyl architecture school and
I was trying to dig deep to get some
dirt on that period of time that I can
in fact anything so hopefully caution
will share thanks actually happens in
Rogers who stays in Paris thank you very
much I want to do actually before you
sat down to if you stand up against that
we can all recognize you for the great
award that you receive
is she like other classes or did they
embody Alaska this is really one for the
professional but also for us so that we
manage our guest tonight is michael
watson Michael received the master of
architecture degree with distinction
from Harvard University and he has a
bachelor of fine arts and Bachelor of
architecture from Rhode Island School of
Design where he also received the henry
adams aia goldman after moving to Los
Angeles anatomy tonight Michael works
for son Gary and then he founded
microwatts large effects architecture
Inc in 1995 he his designs have been
published and exhibited internationally
and he regularly teaches in lectures at
architectural schools around the world
michael is a fellow of the United
Institute of Architects architects and
the recipient of the american academy of
arts and letters architecture the world
meeting has kindly asked me to introduce
my duty because of the personnel and
long connection I have with him having
been my first vaa thristy my roommate at
Harvard someone whose work I admire and
I teach my classes we just spoke about
your work on Wednesday and most
importantly the one who my good friend
Eddie Murphy and took her all the way to
LA that I still hope against hope
the move to LA was a surprising one but
actually very powerful first step in an
amazing career that unfolded since then
and that still goes from the energy of
the city but gives it back much fun
there are very few architects today who
are able to work effectively with the
same powerful hand at such a vast range
of skills some art with its phone and
when they get big they treat their
biggest one my country's his biggest
Biggins for this morning but as hammers
even steven lee strong at both allah
gives him this variegated ground for the
scale of just positions that he must is
very well there are also very few who
are able to assimilate into their work
in complexity of cultural inputs from
sculpture painting but also the
practices of walking driving seeing and
being seen and i know there's a lot of
that point lay one of something the
primacy of architecture as a framework
that holds all this together not in the
hegemonic way but respectfully and
playfully playfully engagement you will
see that and the drivers and surfaces
that are part of that culture see the
world differently and Michael's livings
wink right back again there are also
very few architects were able to find
room and expression for civic pneus in
all their projects the way he embraces
and highlights and lets the public realm
cut through his crowd floors and
sometimes go high and please keep an eye
on his beautiful sessions and to find
possibilities of civic engagement in the
parking ramp or defense that are the
schoolyard are always be unexpected and
invariably stung so for all of the
screen work we forgive you the move to
LA and welcome you back
Thank You hoshen and I promise all of
our secrets are safe the the idea of
this lecture series that was was a very
compelling one to me the idea asking the
question in architecture of where
centers are if there are 72 certain
spent my moved to Los Angeles was to get
away from the center and the plan and to
find the city in which the idea of
Senate was who is very much a challenge
I would certainly argue that that was
Angela some question of Saturday's an
ongoing ongoing discussion on going down
that idea of the range of architectural
practice continues to be a significant
of significant interest reveal driver my
work in fact I think for contemporary
practice that I'd say I'm most
interested right now in range that
architecture while it possesses
incredible extraordinary capacities
towards specialized knowledge and
abilities in many ways my interest is in
architectures of
living as a discipline as much as a
practice to expand its context its
building types the forms of its work
partially this has been in response to
the fact that the range of our working
the types of projects has been extremely
varied and some of that I think is this
luck but also some of that is because we
have actively tried to look for projects
that are not necessarily similar to the
other projects that we're going to
continue to challenge the practice in a
way to take on an increasingly complex
relationship to social political
physical context which especially
working at least partially in Los
Angeles it is going to make your driver
I've come to believe that the
architectures ability to move beyond the
singular building to the scale of master
plan to the scale of landscape and in
some ways to the scale of the social and
political
the discipline itself that in that
architecture continues to have a very
real challenging productive and
optimistic role in culture today in that
sense i would say that while i'm still
very much interested in contemporary
form in terms of what we do i think i'm
even more interested right now in the
form of contemporary practice and it's
in its elasticity we've been working
over the past number of years with root
publish it bro Housing Trust building
permanent supportive housing for mostly
individuals who are formerly homeless in
an area of the city that's a great
transition this could grow district of
Los Angeles which is under growing
undergoing extraordinary pressure from
almost every every direction my interest
in housing in many ways goes back to my
time as a student housing was always
significance to do that took but even
more so it was that in that typology
modernism which was something I was very
much interested in had had seen as it
tight the ability to ask many diverse
many complex questions that went beyond
form and including questions of social
economic political engagements those
mechanisms which are very much the same
types of mechanism that guide the city
itself thinking about a collective
community living
the city makes housing I think even more
important typology today we weren't for
many years able to get housing there
wasn't a lot of housing for architects
to do in Los Angeles a city that is
primarily been marked by in surveys its
identity is a city of the single family
residence sprawling endlessly to the
horizon but increasingly as ncaa's
become more and more factor in the city
housing heads starting to become
something that is a real part of the
conversation about how cities are this
city is being built Los Angeles is being
built I'm not going to show all of the
projects we've done for projects are
about to finish the fourth project with
the Skid Row housing trust just the two
segments third projects with the segment
project Carver apartments which you see
here was built a little bit off of the
immediate center of Skid Row and there
was a reason for that driving that
decision by the trust and that was to
try to take a community which has been
largely anonymous to to the broader
urban and making that much more visible
to the city as a whole and if you go
back to this image just for a second
this is the building here this is the 10
freeway going out to the Pacific Ocean
in close proximity to LA live at Staples
Center which is where the Lakers play
place that that a great deal of the city
comes by all of the time that proximity
to the highway about 30 feet away was
seen as an incredible attribute as it as
opposed to a deficit because in Los
Angeles our public space is very often
the highway itself putting the building
in that kind of
proximity to to the Highwaymen bed
meaning you started to create at least
tacit relationship between a community
that is largely unseen in the public
street of Los Angeles that proximity to
the highway that will also produced a
great challenge and I was primarily the
acoustics on the site which were so
intense that to put housing that close
to the highway meant very very
particular planning for it for the
building to a certain extent the shaping
of the building this round form came
from from the reality or its proximity
to to the highway it became clear with
us working with the acquisition that
every foot that we could get away from
the Highwaymen some drop in the decibel
level of the sound the noise that we had
to deal with and that was important
because it meant that the construction
could get a little bit lighter which
meant it was more affordable but there
was another benefit to this proximity
which had to do with the I won't do this
too many times do but had to do with the
proximity visually as I mentioned to the
highway in the shaping of the building
and it almost certainly a recognizable
iconic form on highway 1 that seem to
relate to that sense of movement and
motion of the highways began to create
not only a greater identity for the
building but potentially in the very
form of the building began to start to
create a tacit conversation between
those whizzing by the car and those
people inside inside the building I'm
very interested in the way
infrastructure in the city plays a role
or how it roll continues to evolve in a
city like Los Angeles you could I think
say that infrastructure in cities like
Los Angeles which have very much
infrastructure with mark sees that the
infrastructure has tended to do only one
thing is heavily everyone responsibility
getting a car from one place to another
creating some kind of access but that
monoculture of use I think needs to
change I think it needs to transform to
take on more responsibilities even the
scale of resources that we put into
infrastructure this scale of literally
just a physical impact and footprint
that it has on City and even though this
project was separated from from the
highway I began to think at least maybe
even fantasized that this building
housing was somehow connected to to the
highway it was a bit of an experiment to
see if parts of the building couldn't at
least begin to insinuate the idea that
there was more continuous relationship
between the under
under user space of the highway with the
entire ground floor of the building the
plan of the building is set up so that
there are series of perspective skewers
that run through the building connecting
different parts of this site and here
you can very much see in the plan ground
floor that is very different than the
upper floor of the drama of the rest of
the apartment building but one that
takes its its form very much from these
these connected views as if the views
through under the highway start to shoot
through that ground for concrete base of
the building as we start to move up into
the building it takes the shape of its
more visible form up above all of the
apartments any nine units are exactly
the same one slice of this area PI
they're all studio apartments with
kitchens and small kitchenette inside of
the courtyard bathroom and then studio
apartment facing facing to the outside
one of the small but consequential
inventions in these buildings is that in
each of the buildings we've moved from a
double loaded quarter typical apartment
floor plan where their apartments on
both sides of a quarter and a little
problem with this one of the challenges
and for this community is that many of
the people who have been chronically
homeless over many many years have
started to create most psychological
shells around themselves it's a cruel
irony that they've been in public space
for so long that the only way of
combative net is to create intensely
private lives and in the old model
people would come in the elevator go up
down the floor
into their apartment and you've never
seen them again what we've done in most
of these buildings is to crack that open
creating a single loaded corridor around
some kind of a semi-public courtyard so
every time somebody comes to and from
their apartment in a sense they are
navigating semi public space more of a
communal space while I don't believe
that architecture in and of itself
changes this deep social dynamic I think
it is one of the ways through planning
that strategic planning that
architecture can play maybe even a more
therapeutic role in that loosening up
that equation that inside courtyard
space is very much the social part of
the building at the ground level there
series of large stairs that become
almost an amphitheater for the community
they do community meetings they do
performances bands play here all of the
apartments as I mentioned you around
this courtyard its marked by these long
fins that are we're very important
development in this building because the
courtyard is is so tight they act a
little bit like blinders on the port's
that they create more opacity to your
next-door neighbor when you're inside
the court would always allow you to see
directly across and connect you to the
comings and goings of the community
around it they also have the effect of
as they spiral up starting to reflect
the light and the color of the sky at
the top of the circular form of the
courtyard and animate that courtyard
over the course of the day so that it's
connection to the outside that drifts
down the by that reflected light and
color changing very much the dynamic of
the inside of this space and connecting
it to
to the outside even though the outside
of the reality is for a lot of those
acoustic reasons very much very much an
internal seven spaces in the first of
these buildings that we did took many of
the social spaces and place them on the
ground floor that seemed to make a lot
of sense but what we realized was that
one of the problems was that they were
more disconnected from the life of the
community inside and instead in the
Carver apartments we started to
distribute them in a spiraling motion up
and around the building as if they were
points on a three-dimensional extruded
compass with each of these spaces
whether it was the outside lounge
otherwise known as the smoking porch the
TV room and laundry room which faced out
towards the highway at center court yard
space the community kitchen which
connects to a ground floor outdoor
courtyard space and then the lobby and
meeting space is directly to the to the
street that each one of them plays a
very different role in Orion appointing
you away from that internal life of the
building back out to the larger
community that surrounds the building
maybe the most important of those spaces
is the TV room and the laundry room it's
one of the places that that community
constantly goes and spends time and we
organize that part of the program at
exactly the 30 foot level of the raised
highway as if it's
type of front porch for for the building
out to out to the highway and while in
this image it looks like traffic is
always moving very quickly in Los
Angeles more often than not the traffic
is stopped in and it gives that
community in a sense both of those
communities the opportunity over the
course of the day to just see each other
and again while I think I'm realistic
about the change that a building can
make in the dynamic of these larger
social structures that fact of starting
to create real visual connection between
these two distinct communities is
something that I think architecture not
only can organize but also has the
ability to start making a subtle
inflection in the expectations of what a
social conversation might be the third
project for the trust that we completed
reasonably recently is the star part
each of these buildings is named for a
apartment building that was torn down in
Los Angeles over the last 20 or 30 years
star apartments which you see here is
moved back onto or within the Skid Row
district and I think it's important to
see just the proximity between that
district and and what people think of is
that quintessential skyline of downtown
Los Angeles
which is given the scale of Los Angeles
a bit of a misnomer that there is in
fact a downtown but it is a part of the
city that is starting to see a more
intense and maybe more traditional
intensification of the city one of the
concerns of the Housing Trust has been
that the projects that they've done have
been primarily about housing only about
housing and not as much about a
connection or mystically to to the city
this is a district which is fluctuating
between having a strong street life and
in many ways being a place in which
certain times of the day the city just
disappears the goal for this project is
to create a really a messies project
that has been complicated for the trust
because they take certain subsidies for
the rental of these units and that means
that they are also subject to many of
the regulations of the housing authority
one of those regulations says that if
you're doing this type of subsidized
housing that you're not allowed to build
projects that have retails for promised
to them they don't want
you're in the housing business you
should just concentrate on the housing
business and that's all you should do
because the Skid Row the Housing Trust
has wanted to have a stronger connection
to reinforce life on the street they
wanted to again take the very simple
measure of putting retail space in the
ground floor of the building and they
looked for the Polish found and the
loophole says that if you buy a building
that has retail in it or if you have a
building already that has we tell me you
can keep that that we talked on so they
did in fact buy a building which was
this one story very typical downtown Los
Angeles building with parking on top
almost a sacrificial stucco exterior
around around the outside ground floor
retail which was filled with lots of
small mom-and-pop type of retail shops
this building is a little bit on the
edge of the garment district and so that
some of these shops served the garment
district because of the need to keep
this keep that retail in a sense going
to fit within those regulations from the
housing department we needed to use this
building and you can sort of see it here
in this rendering of the project made in
fact we use the existing building as the
ground floor of the new building that
was complicated it created a number of
technical challenges for the building
but this building was many ways
ambitious for the trust in a number of
levels and one of those was at this
level
not only of doing the excuse but also to
begin to talk about a larger question of
urban sustainability and in Los Angeles
this would have been a kind of building
that would have been for the most part
torn down scraped clean and you would
have built a completely new building on
top of it a few years ago the idea of
reusing existing fabric even existing
fabric that seems as incidental as this
building was a big part of the overall
conversation of the building second
issue that we were beginning we were
starting to take on was this question of
density and what density might look like
in a city like Los Angeles where there
really aren't very new models of density
what I was trying to do in this project
was to create almost a kind of hyper
density within the block you can begin
to see that each of these small towers
bring around the courtyard there's an
additional 10 hour within it which makes
the spaces between the buildings much
smaller much more intimate you again
ring around and walk to your apartments
and that similarly corridor the same
same type of diagram all the way down
through the building but here is opposed
to that central courtyard you're really
in the thick of a dense new type of new
type of urban fabric because of that
pressure of density and the lack of more
traditional courtyard at the center of
the building instead we started to take
that social space and slap it out into
a pancake of different activities on the
second floor of that existing building
that used to be the parking lot in this
case transforming it into an amalgam of
different community activities that
includes community kitchen exercise room
recreation room art classroom Social
Services offices as well as a number of
outside spaces like half court
basketball jogging track around the
entire perimeter community garden yoga
outdoor classroom those that mix of
different activities on that second
floor of space which seems to extend out
into this low horizontal district of the
city and into what I think you could
even begin to say that that larger
continuous horizontal sprawl of the city
was not only a way of organizing these
individual community activities but
starting to see if you could pack them
together into a new type of social
diagram in it's always a kind of
microcosm of of social activities that
started to represent a new
new dynamic a new social public dynamic
in a singular building because the
building was being built on top of
another building and because the site
was very difficult to build on top of we
looked at a method of construction that
has never really been used in Los
Angeles multifamily prefabrication one
other building in the 19th from the
1960s about 50 years ago that used some
prefabrication there's reasons very
arcane code reasons why prefabrication
hasn't been a possibility in Los Angeles
and I get into but here we saw it as a
huge attribute on a very small site and
to stage the construction quickly all of
the units 106 units were built in Boise
Idaho when you can see them coming from
Boise here eventually arriving in Los
Angeles they were built in Boise because
we needed to build this building as a
wood frame construction to fit within
certain codes and Boise they do that
very very well stacking all of the units
once this concrete tray which was
pouring sand built over that existing
building and over that new public or
semi-public recreation deck all of these
units were then lifted into place and
about for about four weeks the units are
all very much the same variant will
attend
but for this community the fact that
having literally a kitchen or their own
bathroom space are huge changes in their
in their life the building as you can
see here the ground floor retail is
starting to fill in its life on the
street is very much starting to become
an active one that second layer is
starting to become a very active part of
the community within the building and
the apartments have all been occupied
for a number of months now very
successful this building and its
relationship I think to the cities for
me one idea about creating a more
complex amalgam of parts to begin to
represent and start to experiment with
how architecture can be in a sense
almost urbanism in and of itself but
it's the scale of this project is still
very much at the scale of a single
building we recently completed a
building which starts to take many of
these same questions and challenges
those questions more at the scale of the
city itself one Santa Fe is a mixed-use
project in this case of a private
development for profit development
developer 440 units of housing
the entire ground floor retail about
75,000 square feet great deal of parking
as well added in area of the city not so
far from star apartments in Skid Row
downtown but in a very different
condition not so much in the middle of
the city but much more at the threshold
or on a threshold of the city as it
develops this whole neighborhood is
called the arts district as a warehouse
district that contains slightly larger
buildings loft-like buildings that much
of the creative community in Los Angeles
has lived in over the years it is
immediately adjacent to the Los Angeles
River which is undergoing or about to
undergo a sequential significant
revitalization partnership with the Army
Corps of Engineers it's just across the
river from East LA which is the part of
the Latino community in Los Angeles
which is now the majority very powerful
politically in the city and as an aside
right next to sire another architecture
school which is a long skinny build the
site that we were given is is it well
it's just an image to give you a sense
of the scale and also she just reinforce
the test I've always wanted to do a
skyscraper but afternoon
tip it up on its side it's the seventh
talk but this site is is really marked
by the fact that infrastructure has been
the thing that has has has created the
grain the scale image of the city
sci-arc which is here which was formerly
the longest building at the university
is an old rail deep road from the Union
Pacific lines that ran through this part
of the city there's still an incredible
number of rail lines including the MTA
lines and Amtrak Union Pacific being
amongst the different rail companies
that went through this part of the city
as well as the first street bridge to
East LA and the fore street bridge that
sense of the long and linear structure
to the city certainly gave rise to to
some of the formula building but much of
it came from just the fact of the
unusual configuration of the building a
little bit wider to the south and
they're very very thin up against this
maintenance building which needed to
need it to remain as an adjacent
neighbor the building is is is the
diagram of the building the planning
strategy is very much as as a layered or
sandwich like vertical this position of
the different programmatic let's at the
ground floor as I mentioned it's almost
all mixed-use retail that stretches from
the first-fruit bridge on on the second
level on the northern part of the site
we couldn't build the parking underneath
adjacent to that existing maintenance
building there are two layers of parking
that gets sandwiched in between so they
float up above and are accessed by these
large spiral ramp switch start to create
markers as you can value there first or
or third street and then housing up
above either five novels to the south or
three levels up above a proposal of
parking that one of my thoughts in this
project which came in many ways from the
previous project star apartments was
that developing densely in the city that
there are many ways of going about it
certainly you can build up in that
skyscraper or tall buildings scenario
but maybe there's also a way of starting
to think of the city city in when it's a
more horizontal city of building over
that lower grade in a sense creating a
kind of power sets or additional
layering that starts to tie the city
together in a very different way and
while we're not literally connected or
on top of fire I think this image starts
to give you the sense that that layering
of a new structure and new building on
top of an existing building might create
a way of not always having to remake the
city tearing the city van
making it but to find ways for new
structures in a city like Los Angeles to
begin to both challenge a scale of the
existing city but to also use some of
the phenomenal energy in the existing
scale as well like this image because it
gives you a very different sense of the
building as it is it stacks up from west
to east with the grain of the different
scales of neighborhoods moving from
larger industrial buildings all the way
to single-family houses in Boyle Heights
and East LA but as you look back to the
building from the other direction across
the river across the rail line across
the power lines it has a very different
almost industrial quality as well and
it's its full length starts to become
much more much more apparent at at the
ground level at the street level you can
see the parking above there's just a
sense of the retail here much of the
retail with these photographs which is
just getting built out the building is
as I mentioned just been completed gram
for all of all the way down the street
sci-arc on the right-hand side and then
the apartments slice over over the top
of it there is an important portal where
the building turns not so much building
the hits the ground but into a more of a
bridge that creates an opening from the
street into these internal courtyards
where the scale of the building starts
to change to a more meandering movement
transversely down through
building again where the ground floor
retail takes place you can see out to
sire sire for the sense almost complete
the urban wall of this interior space
and then a parking lot at the ground
floor which is a flexible parking lot of
times parking can also be used as the
central plaza for for the complex
another view of how the scale of the
building begins to change or break down
to a finer grade including through these
balconies and passages to the
surrounding paper maybe while the scale
of the building at the city i think is
certainly at a visual level one of the
most consistent things about the
building it may be one of the most
important things about the building is
the diversity of apartment types and
scales and apartments that it set so we
were trying in this building to create
as much diversity to the community that
would live there as possible in as many
ways of doing that certainly
economically there's been a conversation
about how you integrate affordable
housing into apartments here we were
literally trying to do it with the scale
of apartments themselves everything from
smaller microwave studios to very large
four bedroom units with two and three
and one bedroom units in between and
that that range that diversity of
different units while unusual in a
typical developer building has allowed
for individuals groups of individuals
students to find inventive ways of
starting to
create relationships to rent these
apartments including some of these four
bedroom units where a people are have
got together to live in them there are
some units in the bridge which are more
of a skip Scott stop configuration
similar to the unit eight corbusier's
unit eight it's where there's one
quarter down the middle and then you
come in and either have a one-and-a-half
store unit up above the one and a half
storey down below advantage of these
units is that you're able to see through
both sides of that bridge from downtown
all the way to East Los Angeles that
bridge as i mentioned creates a very
strong gateway into the middle of the
building but our ambitions here were not
to start the stop in the middle of the
development the ambitions of this
building is is more of a threshold
building as a kind of gateway to that
emerging development of the river
potentially connecting all the way to
East LA at some point was was very much
on my mind as we were beginning this
project we have started who we developed
a conceptual set of bridges which at the
time seemed preposterous all the way to
the river but now with the development
of the river is starting to be revisited
and here's a point that for me is is
very key to this project and that's the
question of anticipation we've been
criticized at some level not too much in
this project it's it's going to receive
very well in general but there has been
some criticism that the project is too
big in this part of the city and I
understand that criticism at the same
time much of what we were
to do in this project was to create a
kind of anticipatory scale scale of the
building that was not trying to meet the
city where it is today because in the
city that is developing as rapidly as
Los Angeles to meet the city today means
likely that tomorrow you've missed the
change of the city but in in fact to
meet the scale of the city in 10 or 20
or even 25 years which is I think a
responsibility in architecture to not
only plan for how a building is going to
relate to a particular context now but
to understand architecture especially in
the city as a component of master
planning for the long term that that
architecture will over the course of its
life building of this type of the course
of its life haven't have a changing set
of relationships as the city built
around it in all of these projects that
i was mentioning whether it's carver
province rainbow apartments all of these
your thoughts are bridge project that
we're doing that that over time I
beginning to understand and not as
individual projects but almost a web of
relationships that build up over time is
quite interesting thinking about laundry
planning the city people believe I think
often that projects like the staple
center or convention center are going to
because of their large gravitational
scale they're going to save the city
they're going to change the city of a
positive just because of their bigness
that they have so much influence in the
city that they will change it ultimately
for the better over trying to maybe
that's true but just as often those
those projects those projects miss the
way that the city is developing what
I've really begun to think is not only
the scale of the type of developers one
Santa Fe is important but really these
types of webs and relationships and the
scale of a project that is based on the
accumulation the iterative or temporal
accumulation of all of the parts has
just as large if not an even more
beneficial role in the city
we're working on a project that takes
some of these same ideas and begins to
visit them in a single building but in a
very different context that's a project
called the booty center at Rice
University in Houston the movie center
is going here on the edge of what is the
more traditional campus of rice
university at a gateway into the campus
which is increasingly becoming the main
one of the major gateway success city as
a development of the campus starts to
move more in this this direction the
moody center is a new type of program
for the university it's not one
department that will run this this
Center but is meant to be a building
that is truly an interdisciplinary
building Rice University's believes in
this building that there is great
possibility great promise and starting
to take many different disciplines from
around campus and the south side of the
city of Houston as a whole other
different institutions like the museum
of fine arts at some of the other
universities and create a building in
which they're starting to curate these
different groups to give them space to
to make projects over the course of a
semester even shorter over the course of
a couple of weeks are over
over the course of the year this
building is in a sense taking the energy
from many different intellectual centers
and trying to bring it together into one
one equivalent to the campus as a whole
we took that idea it started to imagine
again almost fantasize that all of the
buildings of rice if you collapse them
if you started to squish the public
space quadrangles the open courtyards
together that you can begin to think
about the engineering department in the
art department the International Studies
department and clip that out that that
would almost become the building in of
itself rice is marked by these long
linear bar like buildings and so the
building that we're designing the woody
Center starts to become a series of
these longer linear forms that relating
scale to the existing buildings at Rice
in here and diagrammatically you can
begin to maybe get a sense of that but
there's something also important that is
that the that the campus of rice started
flows to this part of the building and I
started to think of of whether almost
that the ground plane that landscape of
the university could slide under all of
these buildings starting to create a
relationship vertically as well as as
well as far as octiline that that ground
floor these different intellectual
centers could be something that
as if the campus was had a very open
pores relationship to the building as
well as being denser floating up or both
of the building we started with
literally just in a series of collage
diagrams it's starting to show some of
these historic photographs of the type
of learning and engineering space would
be with the campus which is almost all
these oak trees very dense up above and
then very open visible down down below
the building is quite literally the
equivalent of that denser building up
above with a completely transparent
ground floor down at the ground floor of
the campus one of the requirements is
building the entire campus is brick and
I'll talk about that a little bit more
which is the first brick building that
we ever done so there is is a very
strong separation in a sense of this is
heavy dense brick series of forms up
about the lightness of the ground floor
this is the axial metric of the ground
floor starts to give you some sense of
the very different types of program
gallery which is a joint gallery run
with the Museum of Fine Arts in the city
flexible student-run gallery larger
studio spaces 99c black box here with
some of its back of back of house faces
this entire wing of the building all
glass are more traditional shops as well
as digital shops everything working
sewing metallurgy as well as
three-dimensional digital fabrication as
you move up into the building some of
these spaces are quite tall double
height triple height spaces and then
smaller more intimate classrooms office
spaces that with some medium-sized
office spaces up above if you peeled
away the outer skin the inside of the
building is almost a three dimensional
topography of a different type of open
and closed learning spaces as i
mentioned large Studios flexible gallery
and connections up above in this case
large stare which can be used as a
teaching classroom in and of itself
that's the range and different feeling
of the interior spaces what the
classrooms I mentioned that the building
was required to be a brick building most
of the brick on the rice campus is is in
that color but because we're a little
bit off of the main quad there was a lot
more flexibility that we were given this
project and I got very interested in
making the building that was incredibly
luminous on the inside and almost like a
series of galleries white gal who's
white boxes what cubes on the inside
within this darker shroud the exterior
the brick that we're using is this
magnesium alloy brick which has a sheen
to it that changes significantly over
the course of the day those were very
blue color to slightly more warm color
over the course of depending on what the
the sky is like and then a very deeply
raised pink grout back from the facade
what that does is that from certain
directions of the building as you come
on it obliquely the building I think the
brick will appear to be very much
intense and dark solid but as you move
around it and start to see the grout
that color that warmer color against the
cooler color of the grout starts to
become much more visible so that heavy
form has real dynamic to it a real
almost choreography to it is as as you
move around it on the campus and see the
building
of and in the more luminous quality of
the inside starting to pour out onto the
campus there are moments of the brick
which trying to screens them so that
long walkways arcades in the campus
you're halfway inside and halfway out of
the building and that that heaviness of
the brick starts behaving the way to a
transparent veil like a sense of that
exterior skin campus and landscape is
something increasingly interesting and
part of our work maybe it grows out of
an idea that in a city like Los Angeles
landscape is so much a part of the sense
of urbanism certainly there's been a
disciplinary level a great mutual
interest between landscape and
architecture as ideas about things like
landscape urbanism become more and more
part of the conversation we're having a
a big part of a conversation how we
think about visit we a couple of years
ago completed a part in an area of the
city called Playa Vista which is this
whole part of the city which was
undeveloped for the most part it's the
old Howard Hughes Aircraft site where
things like the Spruce Goose were
developed a lot of a lot of engineering
work and Aeronautics development
especially during the war on post war
took place it is at least in the eastern
portion of that site has
developing over the past five or ten
years into more of a residential
district very very much in a kind of new
urbanist model but there's a portion of
the site at this end which is intended
for more creative and media type of
businesses Google start the town as a
presence here belkin has a presence here
and we are doing buildings at this
corner which we had received the day
before the recession started then we
lost the day after the recession started
but in a in between we were asked to do
the park at the center of of the site
these buildings have now come back and
were development and thing them again
but the park has become now the context
whereas there was very little context
and when we started the project the park
and a funny way is now the thing that
we're related to with our with our our
movements I'm interested in the idea of
landscape not so much in a classical way
apart to the experienced as an
equivalent for instance to nature is is
a more processional equivalent to World
War an alter ego to to the city but
maybe more in a city like Los Angeles or
in any contemporary city an idea about
trying to create almost an equivalent
not the same but
equivalent to the city in the park is if
you did take a series of these different
experiences and activities and and put
them together to a type of bento boxes
of experiences these are images that the
architectural photographer you want bond
took for a book that I did called no
more play which in many ways I think
start to create a real I get a visual
equivalent to those multiple types of
landscapes and activities that exist in
a place like like Los Angeles that the
buildings i mentioned that we're doing
right here this whole site which looks
like the desert are now napa how was
golf filled in and the park is organized
as a series of bridges activity bridges
that connect the two sides of this
campus each one of them having a very
different activity as i mentioned
horticultural bridge large amphitheater
bridge basketball beach volleyball
children's playground lon sports lon
sports bridge these are the
horticultural gardens which are a place
that you can this be endure through but
are also place where horticultural
classes take place shane sports bridge
where there's everything from bocce and
horseshoes just quiet sitting
increasingly
we're small meetings take place outside
of media buildings so that it becomes
extension of what happens inside the
buildings and each of these these
different activities again like
basketball or beach volleyball have
lives that are very much extensions of
the kind of 24-7 like that that occurs
inside of these is and creative industry
buildings which i think is increasingly
the way that lives are manifest in the
blurring of work and living in if
anybody and architecture knows exactly
what that means that your life inside
the studio in your life outside of the
studio are very much intertwined here we
were trying to make a space that was
again not separate from the life inside
these buildings but was almost a way of
seeing the park is an extension of those
bandshell is maybe the muck the sea or
the equivalent the most equivalent
structure to what we normally think of
as architecture the bandshell this is
meant to be a place for performance even
impromptu performance but it's also very
much a meeting place in the park in
structured data as a three-dimensional
space frame connected only at the very
basis if it's like a clamshell that's
that's opened up to fabric structure
that at night lights up and that skin
that fabric skin over the three
dimensional frame of the
form underneath that gives you a very
different sense of the building is move
from solid to more animate form where
the skeleton of the inside starts to
become way the most important
characteristic oh I like this image
because it not only gives you a sense of
the inside of the shell but when this
space starts to fill up with audience it
starts to connect almost to the balcony
of houses up above which are the more
typical traditional program condition in
Los Angeles of all of us single-family
houses and here you can almost begin to
maybe again fantasize the connection
between civic space and and private
space I want to fish with two projects
with a scale of some of these ideas
between landscape planning architecture
and the city expand first of them is a
project in st. Petersburg Florida called
the st. Petersburg pier it was a project
a competition that we want to replace
existing pier on this site and the
existing pier is is very much an
existing type of pier we're kind of
lollipop of experience you come out see
the water and then go back the same
exact way very discreet and separate
instead what we proposed was appear that
that began to unfold in this figure 8 of
movement that then would connect to
other parks in the city and as opposed
to architecture being the object at the
and instead the water which is the most
quintessential characteristic the st.
Petersburg being the thing at the center
we begin to just get a sense of that
diagram as these these different loops
expanded all the way back to a central
lake at the center of the city project
is very important for me for I think the
thinking in the office it's also one of
the most difficult projects to talk
about because this project died and
diverge forcefully and it's one of the
complex stories I think we're doing or
having ambition of doing this kind of
work in the public or political realm
where the conversation about the project
is no longer between a singular client
in the architect but in this sense is a
much larger conversation within a
context like the here like the city of
st. Petersburg where it's almost more
the the context for a conversation
between the citizens and the government
of the city itself and that conversation
became very contentious with the pier
becoming really the flashpoint the the
illustration of a great deal of concern
about the way that the city was changing
from an older version of the city to
very different dynamically very
different type of scene and the project
ended up going to referendum which was
really a referendum about the city
government but was unfortunately worded
to say that if you voted no you were
voting to cancel Michael Bolton not a
contract with Michael Walton or not the
contract with Michael Moulton
architecture but to literally cancel
like a mall Santa magazine so and the
project was I was voted down in that in
that referendum I'm still around to
somehow I gotta have that but the but
the extraordinary thing in a sense was
to understand the see firsthand a
dynamic in which a project that was so
much about creating a space quite
literally for the conversation to take
place about the city becoming the thing
that was the illustration of that
conversation but of the project the
negative side of that conversation so
all many of the ideas of this project of
something of a project in which
architecture both them attempts to
become iconic in and of itself and for
something to be very identifiable but to
make space be the primary thing to make
something as ineffable as the changing
quality of the water be very much the
center of
the city is a very compelling one for me
here that had a number of different
activities there was a small beach or
small watercraft pier the lagoon which
was a teaching space with docents at the
center of this thing's the canopy
getting quite large as you went out to
the very end of the appear that created
shade and protection for restaurant
gelato shop fishing pier you could also
not just transit around the Michelle but
bicyclist roller bladers geography come
up onto that shell so that quite
literally the surface became occupied on
active as well I mentioned this is the
social part of the city is also the
obligatory federal workshop for that
kind of space but it does start to
reinforce I think the scale of this type
of space with this type of activity
could take place and become that place
of not only daily life but celebration
for the city up on the canopy going to
views back to to the city the thoughts
face some of these teaching spaces when
the tide went out there were loops that
allowed you to go out to amendments
the old pier where there was corn why
like that would take place as you
approached appear from the outside the
activities that I was describing
restaurant ice cream shop down below it
more of a jetty the ramp that came
through this large opening with these to
the inside outside of the pier and then
these smaller balconies arrival the idea
of the pier was for this larger
collective space there were also moments
where smaller groups whether as a family
or an individual could come out to these
balconies and have a more one-to-one or
intimate relationship to the horizon of
that water speed the thinking about that
project has been very consequential for
the last project I want to show tonight
which is a project which is just about
to the starting construction which is
that their sixth Street bridge viaduct
in in Los Angeles this is an older
picture you can see city called the
river before it was channelized running
underneath in this case the sixth Street
bridge is a forestry fraser street
bridge once santa fe that long building
others mentioned right over here this is
taken from the east side looking back to
what is now
the city the river before was
channelized post-war would flood and
there's a very wide basin that that
would create that's why this bridge is
raised it is SSF I that the crossing of
the river is plenty of this one point
that existing bridge at that crossing
had these two has is true very iconic
arches which many people in the city and
outside the city though because this
bridge has shown up with so many films
music videos television commercials
especially car commercials it is though
often studying as a kind of set at set
piece for a deeply dystopic and troubled
and urban and it rough a gritty part of
the city though because it has such a
strong visual connection to what people
think of as as Los Angeles one of the
briefs of the project was to make a new
bridge an iconic bridge which is
difficult to contemplate anything about
how you how you actually create an icon
they won most times that happens to some
kind of a structure over time the bridge
needs to be taken down the old bridge
needs to be taken down because it was
built with a concrete that was using all
of its aggregates from the river and
over time that I
every kid has had a very problematic
Deborah day effect on reinforcing in the
concrete itself is no saving the bridge
what we started to think about in this
bridge when I was I was interested was
certainly making a connection to the
existing bridge and in this case quite
literally through those arches but to
expand that to create a kind of ribbon
of arches from one side of the city to
the other in a sense started to say that
the crossing was no longer a report but
what was important was knitting together
where the cotton continuation of one
side of the city to another to start to
work against the Cylons ation of the
separate ization separating effect that
infrastructure often has in the city and
to use infrastructure here to move from
as I mentioned before that idea of a
monoculture to something that is more of
a multicultural that takes on multiple
responsibilities tying the city together
the bridge has a primary job which is
still to get cars one side of the city
to another but also to get now
pedestrians bicyclists from one side of
the city to another and also in our
project to use many of the spaces that
in the past divide that wasn't so
concerned with because it was the
floodplain of the river to start to use
those as larger public amenities here is
a new Plaza on the Arts District side
which is already being programmed by a
non-profit to be
very much a large Hall Civic of social
call within the city to reinforce the
restoration of the river by creating
stronger praxis and visual promontories
that you can see the river from to give
you a sense that the river is actually
there to take much of the land which is
being which is will become extra
property from the construction of the
bridge and to turn that into a larger
Park primarily for the east side and to
make that part more and more accessible
by additional structures bike ramps
accessibility ramps and also the
stairways up over the arches and in that
sense this project and its attempt to
take something as clear as a structural
engineering project and start to produce
greater complexity to that project to
make something as as direct as the
structuring of the bridge take on other
responsibilities to create connections
not only horizontally from one side of
the city but also vertically to begin to
stack this the different sectional
activities in and around the site and be
able to collapse and we're tie them
together is is a completely
type of responsibility I think for this
type of structure in the city but I
think it goes potentially even even
beyond that a very simple moment of
bridge where the art the stairways come
up and in a few places come up and over
the arch I think you can begin to were
beginning to make the connection to what
it means to make an icon in the city I
think what most people say icon they
think something visually very strong
that you can see you can take a picture
of that appears on postcards at cities
and you can try starting this project I
thought about those structures like the
st. Louis large or the Eiffel Tower or
the Statue of Liberty and each and every
one of those projects is very different
architecture stylistically some hot or
some not but each and every one of them
work our structures that stand in for
the cities in which they are located but
if you look deeper you realize that each
and every one of them is actually an
observatory that their places to go to
go up to and to look out encima see as
much as to be seen and in that way for
me this bridge is is deeply important
that it's not only a thing to see and
hopefully it is very strong
full presence in the landscape but it's
also a structure that allows you to
bring to literally and maybe even to
begin to in a more insinuating way give
you a place to see the city to see the
city now and to begin to speculate about
the future of that city to collapse some
of what is happening physically on the
site to make that more accessible but to
also begin to collapse the past the
present and the future of the city and
to hopefully make that more visible and
accessible as well thank
not take questions from Daddy
I want to probe and ask a little bit I
think you'd enjoy your book you talk
about it another time and I wanted to
know how to service and data structures
and leads into the ranch has been
searched in LA that's about you work for
go ago and then get a couple of a color
which is very prominent
L&T book useful and immigrants well the
first question I grew up post-war summer
and one I think I understand those
places when I first moved to Los Angeles
he felt very I felt like contrary to a
lot of people's experience I felt like
it was a place that I knew very well and
at first I thought it was because I who
are watching on TV all TV was filmed in
Los Angeles what I realized was in fact
that Los Angeles is in many ways a post
for summer invisible or much of the city
is the result of that model and I grew
up with an appreciation of that kind of
that kind of place for me it wasn't
didn't have the same stigma that many
people associate with with the summer it
was a place where there was a there was
a real community there was a great deal
of activity that we used the open spaces
intensely and we made up ideas about
those open spaces the small space
between houses for us it was not an
indication of the how much any of those
places but it was more a place where
you could make up a world so I think my
came to Los Angeles as well as when I
see a lot of those suburbs I actually
read a lot of possibility into those
places i think it's it's important not
to automatically dismiss dismiss the
ideas that come from those places in Los
Angeles I think it's given to be a very
different sense of how to do with scale
how to deal with repetition and maybe
even more importantly to give me a very
different idea about what I learned
context to me when I was in school when
I was in school especially when I was
how she misses it was very much at a
moment where modernism had been there
have been a great deal of question about
the trajectory of modern post-modernism
that had a strong imprint on education
it was really questioning of of
modernism had produced and and a kind of
classical or more traditional
city was a big part of the conversation
I think we questioned that great deal
and one of the there came out of that
was this idea about context being used
and two simple away that if she made the
cornices all the line up and made the
windows be the same that somehow you
were being a contextual architect moving
to a place like the Los Angeles is very
difficult to imagine how you do that
because context isn't so apparent it's
difficult to replicate something in a
city that says heterogeneous is a place
like like Los Angeles it started to make
me think that you needed to evolve the
idea of context to a more complex and
nuanced understanding of the city and I
began to be much more interested in the
idea of the character characteristics of
a place and I was trying to imagine if
if you could begin to identify that with
almost
to analyze those in some concrete way
and begin to extend those
characteristics as a way of not
replicating other more traditional
models but finding value in in the
openness of a place like Los Angeles and
trying to find a way as market type to
extend that might even relate a little
bit to your question about color I'm
surprised about the question of color
frankly because most times the question
that I get because it relates the color
is why are your buildings a lot white in
a way about the anti-com I actually
think that I am very interesting and
even in the whiteness of many of my
buildings I often think that I'm
thinking about color or maybe not color
so much as the fact that I think of
color is the material I don't think of
color in the way that most people think
of it as as color it release very often
it gets used in the same way that or
similar way to the way that architects
news use materials to create differences
and separations in normal space but if
you take a little bit in a deeper as it
relates to something like the idea of
characteristics a place where the idea
of the whiteness
buildings I started to become onion I'm
suspicious in the turrets that's largely
because I kept architecture is too often
given itself an essence made itself easy
on itself by by using materials in a way
that they stand in for something
extended for the quality of the building
by using particular materials where they
stand in for the contemporary pneus of
the building by using certain materials
and I began to believe that that often
felt the buildings there they're
impacted necessarily last it wasn't a
strong it was more fleeting and I I I
was pushing myself I was challenging
myself to try to make buildings that in
a sense for aunty mature
buildings that that had just as forceful
of effect just a sculptural length of an
effect not only in the forms but in the
spaces but without using what I was
thinking was the crutch of crusher
materials what came of that was for me
the idea that or the reality that very
often that neutral canvas took on many
of the characteristics of the place
whether it was the color over the
courses they were intense grittiness of
the place and I started to use different
textures to transmits plaster in Los
Angeles to exaggerate exaggerate and
that i think has informed a lot of my
thinking about the qualities of color as
they relate to those characteristics as
an aside is one more piece of that that
was influential earlier on at least the
way that I approached color we did a
project the number of years ago earlier
when the office was a few years old for
a museum of modern art
which was to take they were building the
atomic Richie building it was to take an
old building as as swingline stapler
factory in Queens which is outside of
manhattan and long island city and to
turn that into the temporary space for
Mama exhibition space while they built a
new building and the existing the
swingline building was a light blue one
was robin's egg brick building for
territorial reasons for climatic reasons
the building was to leaky their major
pieces of work to try the museum you
need to reclaim the building in this
stuck with his Efus system on the
exterior but everybody knew that
building is blue building it had an
enormous cultural imprint in the city as
a whole if you came in from JFK you know
the building and I wanted to extend or
at least connect to some of that that
cultural history so we made the building
we color the building on the top blue
again is what Jews dinner was a more
contemporary guru but it was blue
nonetheless we picked the blue and put
three blue colors that I thought were in
the family right blue color we sent them
to New York and they painted these large
10-foot by 10-foot panels on the side of
the build and I flew to New York to see
them to work with everybody to pick what
was the right blue of very excited it
got off the airplane into
k got the car me from eating the Long
Island City and I got out there were
there was the building there were the
three pounds of blue and all three of
the absolutely the wrong colors and I
realized that they were wrong because I
picked those colors in the Los Angeles
light and those colors were living now
in a very different long island city in
his coast like and it was a very instant
very hard very direct lesson that that
character characteristics with place
that nuances of different places are
very real and that at that point I
started to believe that it's not that
brick signifies building in one place or
another or one material signifies your
relationship to context but these other
in some ways more nuanced more abstract
characteristics are even more defining
of the architecture its relationship to
to those particular places and that I
think this has influenced directly both
my fascination and things like color but
in our constant questioning of how to
approach
thank you so much thank you
