[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
inside
[Music]
the question of informality should be
considered with attention in the
perspective of the Syrian reconstruction
why
first as you may know before 2011 more
than 30% of cities in Syria were
informal settlements second the
organization have become more informal
according to some destination more than
two-thirds of the distribution are
located in neighborhoods you can see
that for example on this map of the
green part our settlement is a map from
viz and the red dots are damaged you can
see Center the great majority of damage
are in informal settlements so it's a
bit it's a bit worth to think about
reconstruction because
[Music]
for action so what I mean by upgrading
upgrading is when you have something
which is some buildings or some
neighborhoods which are destroyed or
which are an adequate or which are you
would like to click them so this is
upgrading and even if the if it's when
okay
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
okay Madison will be in three parts
first I will present what is informal
settlement in Syria before 2011 and
after 2011 second what was public action
and urban infinite informality before in
for 2011 and after and then what are the
representation that governs urban public
action which are sale an informal
settlement and reconstruction so
informal organizations Here I am going
to go quite quickly I don't know if you
know about a little bit about it
what is informal organization in form
settlement it's like it doesn't it has a
definition but it is different because
it is defined by mouth so finally
normally it's a local local category it
is
their different roles have been enacted
and so that mean the beneficiation
is is moving from from time to time so
that means that the category is moving
also the definition in in Syria is mujer
fat means what is the building in
fracture
what are the infraction in buildings
it's both building in fraction meaning
that building without comment of the
questions and in fracture in building
that means building that has permit but
they built more different but the first
the first informal segments are under
the first category first of the two it
is building which are has not permit for
different reason that is because they
contribute master plan public expression
and too fragile actors in town it could
rip into construction every every low
has its own list but more or less it's
it's the same it's okay it was not it
was forbidden to build and this is the
one building but is when used in formal
sense then from settlement there is no
nullification we use they use zone of
collective contravention to census so
spend three hours in this question so
the urban fabric is really important as
as you can see on this these photos we
really can see the difference between
informal settlement and formal because
because of their urban fabric and why
people buy fabric is standout setback
all these notes make that you have
different urban fabric that was around
40 percent of the population of six
million to other information about these
neighborhoods they were to talk to guys
building on agricultural land of the
people they bought the land but not very
formally it was forbidden to build on it
or they were squatting on public land so
it is two different time something which
is important to understand
[Music]
[Music]
but it is
[Music]
[Music]
without replacing it if they are they
are they are
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
in fact in scale it is so
so huge of the insecurity which is the
characteristic of sentiment I'm not
describing
[Music]
I'm developing that but it is it is
really in formalization of the
organization now I'm coming to my second
part I would like to to say I'm going to
go there is a breeding and urban renewal
a pretty III explain you know people to
stay on the spot general mainly a
greenie goes with population staying on
the spot an example on the top here
hi in this happened since 20 30 years in
please don't look at this table it's in
French
I just colors
so these are the noodles from 2000 to
2010 11 before all the notes are from
urban planning and housing and
investment work from the 60s 70s 80s you
had new set of flows from and so you
know and there are competing competing
situation for 10 years with Soros who
still it upgrading and regularization
this orange ones and others who
encourages urban renewal and investment
so you had both both movement drink this
10 years and you can move more of the
construction as you can see project but
what is important to show is this double
is parallel movement it is the same with
urban program toward informal settlement
you had some program who were promoting
upgrading and other who are promoting
urban renewal is list of auto program
and so again we could see so those who
were promoting upgrading was more with
the Ministry of couple administration
those promoting more we had this boat
with this is informal settlement so the
red and pink ones were places where
policies wanted to have urban renewal
and the green one is where you had a
great plan and yellow and just have a
look on this place because this is the
place so what in fact these two movement
continued but one after the other to
[Music]
calm the situation and and so they were
grading announcement 60% of the
settlement will be a grading policy it
was adopted and then announcement that
all the settlement will be legalized and
2012 term and fighting started and in
addition to work its friction and
bumping bumping the informal nature of
settlement
[Music]
all your abilities the interpreter is
below went on top of that and this
decree to redevelop informal settlement
16 2012 and so you had you had both the
movement first these law there were
destruction of informed settlement
without without fighting and urban
planning was used as a weapon because in
fact as I just told you our renewal is
always a meaner to push people outside
so having having this big very big which
[Music]
we push people remember these projects
have been planned before and then used
for that
again with two categories okay these
intersect man we're going to renew and
these we are going to upgrade but the
one that they are going to upgrade were
populated with people who were idea from
the regime and those who who who was who
were designed to be renewed by renewal
project like this one were the open and
then this this low ten from last year
it's an extension of the three sixty six
and now it can change and then the
president justify that Hoagland does not
belong to the one who lives in it the
homeland belongs to the one who defends
it so it is clear in the mouth of the
president that okay the land is not
anymore
how people are thinking and would like
to make urban planning urban planning is
not like technical planning is really
decision are made in position and power
relation it's it's always very very
political but it's also a technical
question so the question was how people
are thinking because okay you have
people are negotiating organizing your a
project but everybody has in his mind
different way of thinking and with idea
and strategic reasoning okay what is the
social change I would like but also
there's strategic reason okay who will
have the mind
what is the territory where is it you
have all these is in the head of all the
people who are working and so finally
all these representations are around the
question of land okay
so for each - it's okay this is the
other then you will push it simple for
the land rights if the right of
ownership is preeminent if there is a
look you can see rights we could
knowledge which what's the case in Syria
this is the reason why you have these
two parallel kind of forces the even if
it's not conflict if it's not war
if there is political opponent it's an
area to recoup here so you will manage
to have open renewal there but if this
is the people that would like to keep
here and for political reason vote for
you will go for autosave regular planned
but if you think that there is a local
fabric there is a social fabric set up
just break it like that and memory
there's people are living here it's not
only technical standards then you will
so 11 after 11 it's nearly the same the
only thing that changed is that for the
land rights that the right of ownership
is prevalent this is 2000 unfinished and
so this is the same way of thinking and
that's why I wanted to tell you that
it's the same way of thinking with
informal settlement and
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
the
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
and the actual actually existing
population change and this would be
reinforced with two such policies
because many registered I title I
destroyed the refugees title and the
problem of hair and go back to get their
land and even those who have they will
have very small shares
[Music]
so okay so even if could be under this
when you were no is it going to happen
this today
the point is there are ongoing upgrading
processes for homes with international
donors and NGOs and those are doing
upgrading if they are repairing the city
they are starting to so another
competition and also a lot of action
refugees but in fact nobody can set
anything right because we when we speak
about reconstruction where construction
we think peace but peace is between two
enemies and here there is only one one
part who decide things it's not rec
instruction it's not proportion of
reconstruction in the context of its
context I would say but it's not as
there is no reconciliation so this and
finally have to use the construction
research
[Applause]
