so again welcome back from lunch I'm
just a burner a PhD student here at MIT
within the architecture history theory
and criticism program and it's my
sincere pleasure to introduce the second
panel today titled traveling case which
special eights on the significance of
case three at MIT case five at the
university organ and k 6 at MIT in
Boston now to found these meetings this
is to situate whose pieces together
loose pieces which all question
architectures ability to reach out
towards other disciplines towards
political activism and towards societal
engagement reaching outside of
architecture standard Frost was not
every case members ideal in fact it
became a polarizing theme on one side
satin members who believed our texture
and practice itself was the goal on the
other side and the subject of this panel
are the case members who understood
architecture to be part of the larger
political and social context one which
required interdisciplinary thinking
problem solving and activism as part of
our text tool kit case 3 5 & 6 may be
seen as a break from other case meetings
though i would like to posit the
underlying push from these meetings was
part of the atmosphere case from the
start to illustrate the opposing side
voice let me begin with the telling
quote in response to cases first
editorial statement in 1965 participant
khalid road here write this letter dated
jun 18 1965 to a young Stanford Anderson
quote one wishes for a title without my
evilly activist overtones include
suggesting even the group's name was too
political for row row continues quote it
also has a sentimental
just activists by the distinct own it
uses the word total total environment
total architecture etc God knows how
many times and clothes and finally wrote
as a conclusion I think that already
there's a note of two great sobriety and
liberal istic tolerance about our group
can something not be done about it and
Rose fence meant was not singular many
encases group question architectures
role in political issues of the 1960's
such as war protests the growing
environment concerns and civil rights
issues as the groups divided heightened
certain members even threaten to secede
and form case West group which would
engage more freely in political and
social issues certain members push
against prior modernist factions and
reached out collectively to other
disciplines politics and alternative
methodology with in architecture case 3
5 & 6 provided the forum for such
debates set on campuses both east and
west the case three MI t√≠a that provides
us followed with the group's most
interdisciplinary engagement though to
note the campus was a prominent site for
political activism in the 1960s as well
mi T's architecture faculty members were
key in making a political stand visible
on campus here in a crescendo event
following mini from tests show here on
the pages of AMD the president 1968 a
protest structure created by case
participants robert houdin who spoke
earlier Hank millen and many others
included a tent city a scaffolding
structure and an occupation of the main
public space now our political invasions
did not focus in case direct pastry
directly it is easy to see how the
atmosphere friend
speaking case three was hoping to
Sciences influences and instead of
focused on the brain titled perception
and creativity the 1966 weekend event
took place at the MIT Endicott house a
25-acre state south west of Boston in
denton Massachusetts perhaps a better
setting than this aesthetic competent
today organised by professor Stanford
Anderson with Hank millen the event
sought to end what this is quote and the
isolation from other disciplines input
sessions was grand sweeping titles such
as perception and creativity included
participants such as psychologists
Richard how neurophysiologist David
Hubble was later in the Nobel Prize
winner and philosopher mark Borkowski on
aesthetic perception the influence of
Christian normal chokes and his 1965
publication intention and architecture
which looked at the perception and the
role of intention was apparent as Colin
row and Robert slutsky also gave a talk
on the physical and phenomenal
destination definition of space in art
and architecture kingstree was
interdisciplinary product the loss yeah
found a way to effectively engaged well
science and architecture in the same
conversation later MIT Dean Lawrence
Anderson also commented on the effects
of images the interdisciplinary ethos
and MIT as focused on quote the more
friendly architectures or more
interested in the quality of materials
and attention to the climate and local
conditions that seemed to be the case to
seem to not be the case with doctrinaire
modernist and work in case five here at
the University of Oregon offers us the
more politically active example the
teacher at the university of oregon on
january thirtieth to februari third in
1967 organized by professional in lindon
orbit around larger societal and
political issues including architecture
relationship to the environment politics
and the discipline societal role Donlon
here also today referred to fondly as
the traveling zoo which is the namesake
of this panel by Lyndon the t-shirt
format echoed more directly the
political demonstrations on campuses
across the United States the University
of Oregon in fact was a primary and
early site for such demonstrations for
example the johnson hall sleepin where
students overtook the main
Administration Building in 1966 in
opposition to the ROTC and the Vietnam
War or more directly involving
architecture students here the poverty
shed protests in 1967 which created in
utilize a large as you like structure to
protest American excess and world
property or perhaps my favorite and the
most Oregonian the 1965 protests to
treat demonstration lunch where students
and locals inhabited the traffic median
as campus officials trying to cut down
university trees case five use the
activists idea of occupation by melee
mingling amongst existing third and
fourth-year studios and faculty at the
School of Architecture and added to the
curriculum during cases week-long stay
the teachings activist agenda was
apparent also in the plan seminars
included care environmental controls by
Thomas Freeland environmental problems
and politics and architecture by Hill
and place making and problem solving by
slutsky and to note the red lines and
that this was
our changing event and therefore people
came and went at Oregon the debate over
our sections role in such political
issues was not fully discussed as many
primary case members did not attend such
as Peter Iceland or Richard Meier though
the many absences were not understood as
an act of defiance Anderson letter later
stated quote they didn't object they
just weren't there and quote an absence
in this case could also be easily
understood as passive resistance to the
activist agendas at play correlations
can be drawn between case five activism
and a layer smaller MIT Boston k6 and
accompanying exhibition in the fall of
nineteen sixty eight organized again by
professor Anderson the actual case
meeting engaged MIT students over the
course of a full year and began the
exhibition exhibit then culminated by
Henderson and students MIT faculty
member Maurice Smith build a small
injuries theorem and the exhibit was
part of a longer at mighty engagement
pedagogy met Met met activism it should
be noted again that many non case
members were included in case six and
the reception was mixed professor
Anderson noted that quote personal
friendships were not lost but the New
York area members and perhaps others of
case were not pleased with the content
include in the loose structure k 6
perhaps the aim to reach out and gone
past the limits of architectures brass
if the case 3 meeting at MIT the case
five teaching at Orkin and the key six
Boston MIT matey meaning can be uttered
understood as the product of those
within case seeking a more politically
socially and environmentally engage
responses side that field apart
texture our panelists today grass can
elaborate on how case engaged the
problems in the dead and how we can
learn from such a tense to those issues
which continued to walk the halls of MIT
and every institution today so before
the panel join us let me introduce the
members today our moderator this
afternoon Michael Hayes is the Elliot
noise professor of architectural theory
at the Harvard University graduate
school design and associate dean for
academic affairs professor gaze has been
at Harvard since Lincoln cd8 and
influential work spans European
modernism critical theory as those
issues in contemporary practice
professor case was also the founder of a
woman assemblage torn on which we were
chatting about it at lunch for which I
spent many hours shifting through on
Jason also our panelists our first
analysts markers Beck who brings a
wealth of MIT knowledge to the people
professor jars Rebecca's professor in
the history of theory at architecture in
MIT and his work ranges from the 12th
century to the modern era with a
particular focus on the nineteenth and
twentieth century statics and he's an
advocate for global history is many
accolades of publications under his belt
which I want this but i would like to
mention his generosity and leadership in
education here at MIT as a parent and
appreciated every within our department
and donlon linden case member and i
believe professor emerges and
architecture and urban design at the
university of california berkeley
formerly head of architecture MIT and
the universe ooh organ linden was a
founding editor of places journal and
authored books in architectural works
including Pembroke dormitories at Brown
University and a place near near to my
West Coast art sea ranch on Dominion one
with ml TW and finally case member
Stanford others
from MIT where a stock since 1963 an
advisory professor in junkie University
in Shanghai he writes on architectural
theory modern architecture American
urbanism epistemology and story ography
and has published many books and
articles on such subjects he is
co-founder and director of our year HTC
program at MIT and we'll begin this
afternoon so please welcome me and join
the palace to the table but also
professor Anderson is going to begin or
hop on up professor Anderson's going to
begin with the presentation
they also do it thank them for making
this happen we were fighting our
equipment so that I did this or he did
but he did in one area people this
session has been cold traveling case
actually like suggests an aberrant case
and for what you've already heard from
Jessica I can't see the attitudes and
the industry some of their virgin in the
MIT and the important groups and having
said that applicable for whatever so a
verse from the New York result but they
haven't said that fella put in an
ethically that's when Peter Eisenman and
michael filen I met accidentally refer
our first dean of graduate school Logan
Michael Peter were in the partition of
bourbon in Avery hall and I was
beginning my pc and artistry the kind of
our petition in the new brakes Colonel
run home well by the afternoon of
British trees native but it kept us
pretty well at the end i looked at the
library and its current work on it but i
had no idea what to do with this library
maybe i'll be happy
crystal whatever day it doesn't measure
whether the Avery was pretty empty but I
hold the door to your room Tara to dive
city and pub front of it and follow said
come on him that's Peter and it's going
to pierce attitude ever since Neely
here's the one completed pitched one is
by the Canadian Open Houdini he's the
one who really negotiated these Missy an
exhibition of MoMA and invited the
members of geese drubbing at including
me he's the one of the planet me into
the Institute worked out project notes
over the years Peter than both the
faithful friend a big supporter and that
despite the back park are thinking
somewhat different and we're going to
explore some that differences for
differences today now what I appeared to
say first there's a little bit redundant
systems go ahead I've been to make a
good actually absolutely talking about
case 3 & k 6 right now histories and
lambda competitors by affecting on some
of the experience of the first princeton
meet away topics their team to shape
whether became pastry and i also want to
begin by recognizing that there were
three figures were senior figures at
Princeton one that were important to
that event column row cornell Vincent
Scully of Yale and over men to repent
they were all about a decade older than
most of the participants and had the
more established careers in pirate a
seniority Carlo had been mentor to
Eisenman at both
cambridge rely on mutual interest in our
independent studies of the scientific
epistemology of karl popper rose
impressive essays on modern architecture
especially Corbusier were well known and
respected by all the participants at
Princeton row continued as a member of
cases throughout its history my
assessment as the caller was especially
effective than resisting the occasional
flirtation with he poked in and
messianic schemes false he had already
criticized in the history of modern
architecture Vincent Scully business
colleague senior professor at Yale
arrived with the fight ambiguous
ambitious an agenda he showed interest
in a festival was also constructed
offering that products in his this new
group could find a place and Yale's
noted general perspective I would have
said that Scully to ride with the
thought that he might be the effective
senior person in his potential group
however on one hand he imitated some of
the pen participants spice overt
criticism of the work of venturi and on
the other hand there was strong prism of
Scully particularly but hate women
Scully letting the crew from the group
before the second meeting in the third
for senior person robert venturi had
competed his mother's house and the
visiting nurses had words with the
notable exception of Mike only Kimmel as
who designer Boston City Hall's venturi
was the more advanced in practice of any
other participants position of entry
took their kristin is best explained in
my second poppy initial realm of the
table discussion but I can't dissipate
that discussion by milling inventory was
emphatic he his decision not to join the
group okay so that some kind of melon
additional round of the discussion
and should you hear that but making
selections here in order to lead k
street apt to try to do a summary of the
entire princeton one in the first
substance obsession of princeton a while
the basement gave an account of why he
had sought his colleagues have felt the
meeting to be the entire Moines was
devoted to statements by each of the
people present we will come to the
subarray horizons position after he is
confronted with the objections of
Roberts entry into the writers of the
parrot statement this is in Houston
Korean this is going to be a meeting
about abstract ideas and directions I
really don't know what my ideas are my
precious armor until I can relate them
to my specific problems as a building as
an architect microstation does not come
from lack of opportunity to talk where
the propagandize or to expose my ideas
on how to the teacher my thoughts my
thinking concerns ideas and direction in
architecture as an artist must be
related must be a byproduct it must be
related to working into doing really was
our great problems to simply this
architects are not given the opportunity
to start soon enough he was constantly
looking for heroin with commissions
hello this antagonism to thought came
despite effective entry was then at work
on complexity and contradiction which
first appeared only months later
introspective nine in st which i would
think was filled with ideas that seem
more lady could generate further than to
flow from doing his mother's house
those participants who were in practice
closer to professional work all endorsed
and Therese position that would be in
the kennel which admirer timberland
Angela professor Bob Filner the doers
provoked this response to license this
is a summary of the initial position I
said I'd like to come down very strongly
in opposition to message venturi and
kennel real perhaps to Newton buyer to
less read for what I think is a very
limited objective and make so many
assumptions that are intolerable to me
facing just the problem of the teaching
or facing the problem building the
assumption is that if we all were to
have jobs or to be doing commissions we
would produce a better architecture
because you're young and have ideas or
just because of who we are there's an
assumption that we are prepared or have
been preparing people today with his
problems what we are saying is school is
effective that we aren't effect saying
the right things and mr. Gregory says he
gets a chance to stay safe enough one
doesn't feel the need to talk anymore
I'm not so sure what he was saying is
not right but if it's being overshadowed
by here for other people who perhaps
another 15 position I'm not so sure this
efficient decision shouldn't be here
thus from the first session of the first
meeting a group had a basic division
Anderson craft and grades milla monroe
and in this meeting Scully were not a
one line vitamin over a hundred into
debates on issues of communist Jack
Robertson had not arrived in time for
the first session but there's effect
related sessions none of us once you're
not exaggerate this is lured finger
division that the exception the venturi
all the other doers
briefly into the discussions at boggle
that they remain depres of case though
perhaps less engaged than some of the
spectators Third Point the discussion
that Princeton did not look to existing
models and practice was worth noting
that the doers and Nordica thinkers
offer any model from a distant practice
well these some of the architects
president were known to be the virus
rumors of caboose his work was novel
danced as a model for contemporary
development there were pretty dismissive
of Johnson Rudolph stolen yamazaki and
start our tix of heat of the moment the
Philadelphia group Hitler when we come
there was a lament the konica who longer
get a commission at the University of
Pennsylvania Scully had posted a very
small migrant uncommon nonetheless there
was only parenthetical mention to calm
those Scully's pops of you with the car
may have provided the Animus for today
that commentary on Ricky venturi I was a
great admirer calm and living beneath to
learn from his coughing work but it
appeared that all the participants were
ready to inquire into the problems and
pretensions of architecture rather than
to consider existing models the case
despite doer finger differences lasted
for almost a decade maybe going to the
preference for exploration rather than
the adoption of existing models but also
to the practical matter the three
persons making team and commitments
group president myself and after China
an agency
with hidden but the ensuing six meetings
didn't vote all the numbers and the
content of those meetings was already
anticipated in the discussions at
Princeton in 1864 I in my last copper
criminal Princeton one selected aspects
of the discussion set the agenda per
case three and you know but Billy
Anderson took on the organization of
case three what issues could be drawn
from the discussions at Princeton one
not surprisingly we work within the
interest expressed by those loosely
allied with vitamins position and watch
the Zippy current concerns that we
ourselves and expressed rationality and
at Princeton handless disputatious at
Titan sometimes ironic unless they're
getting pretty discussion the main
concerns were briefly stated but it's
probably shipping from on topics after a
couple thoughts works best using work
actually and interjected actually would
be nice to find out if there are any
common concerns here anke long since
taken a crystal absolute for it fits and
Scully so que no stories in this
graduate of Metro's a gale Hank
perceived and Scully a remarkable
capacity for adjectives and adverbs in
the excitation of hero worship in
architecture that princess kali was
adamant rejection of the profession of
city planning everything's in the
architecture when the question arose as
to adding new members to the group going
coming from MIT with our most evil
system department of planning
application adding climbers Scully made
a heap of clothing position that
provoked this exchange
if you continue the Messianic or
megalomania role that architects usually
so by saying that we will architecture
right now so i think the leader session
bedroom for programmatic statement his
own it was the endorsement rationality
and embed to discount
is the recognition of architecture is
I'm rational and intellectual discipline
and until we treated that wherever it
went out creative that way now the
weaker sevens our biggest cities and I
went okay and that's why i love the
texture is the thing that we ought to be
thinking about now will be kind to
decide out to the sandwich architecture
as a rational discipline to communicate
do it wow we try some problems which are
capable of but I am so Hank it from need
to be a co-conspirator in this
rationality knowing my top area not sure
the medic delivered at the a in London
in 1963 and again the ACS a meeting at
cranbrook earlier necklaces before I
stated it only generally at just one
thank you when you say completely what
is trying to make listen even after we
have reduced that tree door for them
therefore not as much as we can another
problem but already know from long
experience but that doesn't define stuff
the form of the entire context of
building a deep breath and some other is
still a creative directional act that
has designed to come into this as the
catalyst which makes holes they go
earlier that they reckon you can divide
both spoke of the importance of seeking
to know as much as we can you entering
any problem or design but also the
emergency about knowledge and executing
us cleaning the design process if I
continue know me as how the
confrontation see two things this is
critical to no-win of our irrational off
bre first steps are immediately being us
into a situation it's in comfortable we
do know the solution tailored recognize
and the one who recognized to do and
make a fresh start once again and find
it a start the little somehow come to
work quite well with the gnomes the new
leader of the original Kim Breeland Hank
first two areas of inquiry with the
English press for rationality and he is
openness no two disciplines
psychological study of creativity and
computation
and they're both are simple minded
instances the second one is we that
which we call the creative act of being
by psychologists now in narrow to
smaller and smaller things that we have
less and less fear the unknown and as a
result you should learn much we should
be able to approach it with a look for a
lil I've and as a result have less fear
of the thing he does not appear Elliot
or less your mania which would make us
to great expansion opposite that you can
do because we don't have the creative
process is indeed a laptop and it may
obtain VV
this site a couple of lengths the
photographic processes that can be done
with models which simulate a kind of fan
laws which we have in topography of real
time and it was testament of the way you
react to the target environment are very
visual way to the visual what computer
set up as you can feed into it the
buildings and then ask it to show you
what building looks like from here to
show you what the real as I guess
walkthrough can do can have a dude
before this represents to crew the way
but should we put it up FML avoid Hank
my new the early work with the MIT
architecture machine group under
Nicholas Negroponte a computation
architecture was so new that the case
numbers were basically dumped owned by
Hanks exposition of these things that's
also obvious team out discussions of the
psychology of perception and creativity
found in good reception notably from
Freeman and the kennel in the sunday
rapper obsession the theme Richard
occurred just as Hank and relied on the
architecture machine group for gay
science insights into complication of
our condition which should also note the
distinctive character of psychology they
might he middle of condition psychology
but rather the physiological psychology
with research directly on the grade both
of those areas also relied on MIT spy of
engineering and communications
physiology with Hippolyta Norbert Wiener
and the happy extroverted drill med room
author of the still famous paper of the
Frog side it tells the prongs brain Hank
statement was partially lost than the
change of tapes but here is his Indian
the things that are around it they don't
really about and they reduced what is
missing in to smaller area and I think
until I was it sounded very weird ideas
about what constituted creatively
analyzers of finding out how they narrow
down the thing of its raison after
preached to there was an absolute a few
months before Hank night Hindus MIT to
support two meetings in case I merely
took the program organization of the
first of those between the asserted
doers and speculators we were clearly on
the spectrum of your side we wanted to
pursue a rash ilysm or particularly
dependent in sufficient level hitlist
enhanced exposition of a psychology of
creativity that we decided to pursue
that theme curry we did not have yet
experienced to that's the idea on our
own program of case three shows and
radical change in common condition for a
case meeting aside the introductory
remarks Mahinmi case numbers had no
programa hoods they were participants in
a seminary my session and perception
that two distinguished speakers
professor Utley held
department of psychology and professor
david h 2 velvel at Harvard Medical
School in 1981 you belt sheridan nobel
prize in physiology or medicine the
theories concerning 50 information
processing and visual system Hank's
session titled creativity offered very
building identified through my contacts
with Tom Lydon in head of the department
of education the adverse event no one's
interesting to second the emerging
activity and computation and repetition
the site speaks it was marks were tusky
professor of philosophy at Boston
University and research associate in the
Department of his psychology at her
clearly rafalca precept that hatred
advanced at piston one learning from
England refused nothing Hank and I also
chose to invite non-members of case who
might have made both appreciate and
contribute to literature presentations
among those present were James Ackerman
and Wayne Anderson art historians from
Harvard and MIT respectively great
article in yoakum vulval psychologists
from clark university and send out a run
from the department or tissues verbally
contributions of the case three speakers
deserve attention that I've opened one
day to provide however the significance
of case three the case itself is easily
folded despite the discussions of
Princeton that indicated interest in
these issues there's a bill response in
incomes case three was too esoteric and
rightly criticized for the marginal
expectations based on the case members
themselves on Sunday rivers snowy an
event co-host there is ample time to
advocate a different format the case for
more active program was necessary k to
be chaired by Richard Meier of momentum
raised as an external
and yes but person's gone from the road
architecture case for was result
property an aspect of the first session
later today now that's why I have to
save up how Casey the volcom case from
Princeton one I wanted to say just
showing images and say a few things
about case six ok sticks this took place
in the hidden gallery here at nmit
hidden Calvary was actually done it very
important tho kappa main action our
battalion of HTC in the middle part he
was the through the art historian in the
first artist rain met at MIT and the
Institute very quickly sought his
capacities and do on him to be the
director of a gallery in space system we
still know you're the hayden library
this chamber conscious was the hidden
government and he brought that guy rage
to a little redundant was the best
gallery contemporary art is awesome in
those years and yet other activities
that the arts alive here at MIT so when
they paid the use of the hidden gallery
50 months and one of the comparing
exhibit and I worked with students to
both develop an exhibition of
development installation and then an
exhibition of the net and i found the a
new product fiberglass reinforced
polyester structural sessions in
beautiful colors and the haven gallery
was too sorry Simon
used accepted government intelligence we
the idea was to make a three-dimensional
construction in the space I'm in and
habitat man with an exhibition and stood
there a group of students who worked
with me for a firm both aspects of that
and just to give you kind of small
insight into it jurist in breeding of
melancholy that was something that was
very much on my mind and I took as being
a kind of vegetable to what we were
doing in the engraving you see
melancholia with the architect for the
master-builders compass and the various
objects curated form of the sphere the
special human but fine at work stolen
the pertinent back and around her a lot
of tools ordinary tools in this case was
Lee Harvey tools including that planes
in the foreground the plane which is a
concept shape nothing is easy especially
beautiful in itself it is conceived in
her and deeper hole to adjust the blade
and fighting to make a very complaint
our service so the way which is working
with me and attempt to reach something
is more perfected nothing thing is this
tension between the idea of a
professional form you might be aspiring
you the tools in which we have to work
with their imperfections and the
in-between qualities it come to this the
kind of low what is complex and
articulated because it's being performed
in order to reach a goal that's not a
thing that's a perfected form in itself
and that there is something about it
architecture as well so that you other
the exhibition contain some of the
aspects of our petition the aspire
form there was a lot of despite this red
goo the chair which is that computer
residence chair his version of it but
there was also the original model for
the Schroeder house that was the Museum
of Modern Art's reconstructed bottom of
the Schroeder house they were gonna the
renderings of the shorter host by mrs.
Schroeder herself she came and visited
in the exhibition and there are other
objects dance mission the web to the
duration of form the architecture but
there was also the upper left all you
see the photographs of the Becker better
photographs of industrial works in
decaying dr. works in Germany he loaned
to us by Conrad boxin who came and
talked about that those works that this
was actually still very new on the
American scene in the middle distance
you see the grain elevators in Montreal
and Philip training team come on bill
provided those photos and came from from
the model and practical grain elevators
for the form that they are for their
role in production and in society and
then you can see that 19th century
pollos and there were there about it
19th century would recognize including
planes for the left one in New Jersey so
we were trying to introduce all the kind
of things seem somehow be adduced in the
juror and ask people to think about both
the ideal in the pursuit vital
importance has
a very important honorable thing but the
complexity of world in which boosting
have a relationship or form to use the
human association we need to also give
had illustrations of the work of our
colleague brought us said it was not the
future thing but it was 700 underlying
concern of the students head of me that
we respected the work of the Mora Smith
who was not receiving seeing the
attention that he deserved by and with
the given entire lecture just on these
two images above all his attention to
materials but they also deform
absolutely each other so they the
exhibition was something was developing
him a three-month position here at MIT
in the independent of case but then I
didn't call a meeting of the case k 6
and we had it took place in the
exhibition and we brought speakers for
example just assured from Berkeley
somebody that was admired both bye
darlin on my knee and by how about one
was at my teeth and this new fledgling
being assured and some other architects
to talk about their work michael bay's
member of cases still here those reddish
in here I'm not a case members case
numbers in silly the k-6 was a mixture
of architects talking about their work
and people as I mentioned both cognitive
rocks when talking about the better
photographs and will help China a deep
anal ease those of lights s hear about
anniversary anniversary of the he had
the genius behind the Mercer museum and
md he would advise reinforced concrete
house in mercer pennsylvania somebody
hit this beat love and concern for
traditional handicraft and panty hard
copies that could be represented by
actively the problems of the planes that
you've seen you look so sat those early
because underlying issues and attentive
institution and then would be topical he
six
I have a few images too so i will also
talk to here for a bit and these are
really either really nice to introduce
it is context of things that we talk
about in my world and the people i was
around on west coast but i start with
this photograph from of the lovetoy
fountain important which is designed by
their how friends has a chain of
mountains but actually the civilian
court was designed by show or no peril
of my partners our office to Madame
Rossini model made it so I show it here
because it is instructor how familiar
that kind of shape looks now but it was
not then I could assure you open and
that shape is actually also juxtaposed
against what was very familiar to
everybody and remains so which is the
kind of rectilinear rationalism of the
1560 so that is part of our own work at
notw my work was part of more determined
litter or and turban and I had also been
open in prison but if you're doing this
this is the house that we did in the
year of 64 which is what I went from
teaching
years at Berkeley 2 to orie and then
this is the other thing that happens in
that year which is the design of the
t-rex condamine one and then this is a
two of the setting for that not as
officially was which was FDA set for our
buildings oh but as it had been by than
six years and some kinds of images that
bear on that would have to do with
relating it to the forces of the
environment to the wind into the slope
of the land thing on the land with as
little disruption fossils oh and the use
of heavy timber which was what had been
happening on that site before we didn't
use the timber from the site itself
delusion which processing involved which
that was in 10 come and bringing um as
in providing a level of complexity and
interest of kind of inner landscape as
you will ever go inside the buildings as
compared to the outside lots of things
to say about the death of all this to
Luke on which is so hard one bottom of
this is the setting for ideas and put on
very recently those had to do with
of needing to be explained even by being
self-evident like squares or having some
connection to set of horses and that
this was meant to be the first of 10 of
80 and we did the time for the whole set
all the moving around the landscape we'd
also josh grant Vincent Scully's so are
the gentlemen to God so walking around
our building walking around the piece
and landscaper very important and so
these are all situated as complex of
making little sub clusters and one of
the things we had earlier articulator
this except concern was to that the
fundamentally architecture was about
differentiating and inside from an
outside but at various scales at Marissa
graduated scales from an intimate little
space you got into anna nicola to them
enclosure to then afford art within a
set of buildings that together mccain
and 74 yards alas that extension appears
the courtyard although that extension
didn't happen huh and in that sentence
of our to the sentence was any kind of a
model of something they didn't go over
the other work that we did at that time
is and it's just the end to show the
spirits of the times are working in this
is the nature of athletic center which
was made to hasten the the tennis courts
and put them all in with big problem
when we first started here we were told
that the average wind speed on our side
plus 50
per hour I and so because down in the
land use the little building that is
Rita dressing room as a windscreen and
then have our supper Solomon of Norfolk
event make these withdraw were these
raped and graphics inside super graphics
and then there was the oldest the
influence of learned helplessness oh the
Halford workshops of one of the most
dramatic which happened at sea ranch
were recently a subject of an exhibition
and lectures have the grand foundation
they had to do it Anna Halprin who is
still a presence of the sea ranch now
this is a work note of a workshop she
arranged in September at 9594 she was me
and Larry's worked as a governor
everything he did lots of had lots of
ideas about how to engage people in
participation lots of ideas about how to
make something and a fundamental
commitment that was adopted and
encouraged that have been absorbed by
almost to thinking that this was a place
that wasn't wildness and so we needed to
make buildings that didn't demolish that
but work with it we're done so that had
to do with something who care about a
lot which was that we were not in the
business of people of trying to make
revolution we were
interested in making things out of what
is and then moving forward making them
better make advances but not by way of
rejection that by absorption Larry also
influenced by Anna the answer developed
a notion about scores as way of planning
and this is his four at the top for what
you wanted to do on this 10 miles of
coast and then the below is the actual
plan that's happened over 150 years now
and some of the building is there a lot
of concern on our part 4 of not for
problem solving so much i noticed
problem solving the part of an initial
discussion for compare like that but but
but taking the forces at work in place
and using them to make the forms out of
which we would build so the matter of
the riding holding from characteristics
that you could recognize in place
reinforce those characteristics to
people the understanding and make Arkham
Asylum oh so the winds of the major
things and leaving a walk all along the
coast these things remain by Jewish rate
and ourselves these are all photographs
from the South later period Jose
and then MLGW in a session fifteen years
later and bill Turnbull than that slowly
the great builder who was a very
important part for the creative process
when George came to six of its hanks
parenthetically he his primary point
that he was making as i remember it was
that you really had to work with the
builder that's part of your creative
process that was an essential part of
getting the kind of information that
would make a building work well he
delivered this all the while and tweed
jacket and blue jeans of straight off
the west coast his own house here and
said about the simpons original hetro
houses he did on right now 50 years
later for years but the 45 when this was
taken and across the meadow is the last
house he did at the sea ranch on the
opposite side using the same set of
parameters but making very wonderful
place much more quickly this is the one
house I design while i was in eugene
what's working on time or finishing and
i think about time the hell did he in
case he and then I need to show one
thing beyond this which is that well I
there i will talk more about the oregon
kitchen one of the things that also
happens in a long way is being at MIT
being with stanford being and some of
the discussions about the bees have a
real understanding
what's going on in place Stanford bag of
eligible to Stanford a under a rental
program a way of mapping how
interactions took place in the city and
he actually had wonderful field trip of
students that works to Matt parts of
Paris and see but the fabric of a lot in
terms of interactions not just facial
reforms and so then I took that same
process as the visitor boundary-pushing
Maryland and we did 500 pounds mapping
them in this way and then doing building
within I have to confess that we the
cover of we deliberately took some
pleasure in making a white cover with
the names of five pounds on it which had
some corollary to a cover that you're
familiar with but it was actually I say
that because of what is back to commit
to saying that we needed to learn from
what the society was doing a mobile
connections work and how that could be
come creative part process oh this is
the place I have now and then some of my
Connor now off you want to do that case
meeting Richard were gonna Jack Imogene
in january nineteen sixty seventy was
conceived as a teacher at the time with
intensive gatherings both teachings as
pointed out earlier for Friedman on the
auraria campus
we're bringing attention to orbit on
moving mill tourism the case teacher
would not concede as an extension of
specific agenda but rather the way of
using the special talents of the case
group assembled a ta√§rgon to bring into
the cultures who will do understanding
and expand this critical dimension what
was then being considered in school as
it's still relatively new leader the
Department of Architecture under the
beach of Walter priests had come as a
package part minutes Walters before I
benefited from his knowing an
enthusiastic support he was also
relatively new distinguished record
teaching architectural history community
service yale Press published it might
publish in 1996 is both the search for
environment he had fond memories of the
80s under harbor or became friends with
way where Sarah was adding adorably in
the class ended early 48 before he
became Dean here at MIT I've no doubt a
bill to recommended me to him Oh Thea I
have to mention the importance of the
naming in the year before I think it was
63 64 which of Khalid apartment of I
mistook the term colors the school of
architecture and landscape program the
planning program is for separately
column and pull then put them together
at the college of art design
intervention
as building a pauper's Paul um the idea
was the importance of integrating the
field concern to the larger version in
landscape involvement in the state was
rapidly extending to the ground
environment who uses an inclusive term
absorbing playa landscaper building all
the thrills and designed is taking
action within that totality head with
the other connection mind colleges
Foreman could have said come conceivably
were stirred when he was here California
I mean here in get me stuff up earlier
he had to hear it at my date before he
went back to berkeley in part because he
spectrum with each other Creators with
Mercer was a formidable of course in her
own has been important to formatted in
photography I believe distracted the
first use of the term college
environment country which is now
replicated many times over it was
controversial as it was seen as
threatening the dominance in the
profession of the hidden time
professional that architecture which
included everything working within this
rubric many distractions also concede
building too complex
the surroundings prevented by the way
they're saying hold of the structure of
experiences and form the context for
living domain for habitation rather
worse than independent life is around
this historical artifacts so they could
have considered that way to until
marvelous stories about cultures and
feel as though each generation finds new
ways of discovering created pension
revealed the following a course of
action that in turn makes changing the
field look through differing approaches
differing interests differing tool and
materials for analysis and a growing
awareness of developments in other
places in time Quentin internals are
commonly critical to hear about what has
enduring impact for significance one of
the most effective ways of moving ideas
about architecture to be more inclusive
and more suitably motivating what has
legs and what in the end crews be
interesting so beside the point the
suddenly of pictures of cases TJ and
I've been fascinated by tracks up off
the beach over decades interactions the
business I stood for individuals and
sometimes for group has reawakened some
wonderful thoughts and I won't go into
the nostalgia part or even how are in
context with Gemma I would say that
their American suggesting that the
conclusion bringing a case of to Oregon
was not was great for people were
willing to come well they have there and
we were in green people there
pieces of living support for it and seen
as a way of revitalizing school which
indeed did some of the themes early
writings that actually my writings that
actually relate to how we were thinking
about school our choice and freedom at
activity counterpoint and improvisation
large English parts relate sometimes in
distortion resistance of push for
communal doesn't agreement and respect
plus insistence unreleased from
strictures of conventional hostility to
the portion of 40 to a portion of defect
recorder or relief provided important
Sabrina imagination into play in the
making of places and Congress in the
backgrounds our thoughts because we had
all studied in princeton in the one year
he was there action Charlton study uses
teachers so it's worth um perhaps up
without much analysis this running
himself true to come a list of topics
that were taken on in this week so that
the format was in canyon school week and
that they engaged in activities rough
with a total immersion in the school and
the idea was to get much more
there were seminars there were lecturers
and the two senior design courses at
design projects scheduled it set up so
that on monday of that week they had a
review and then people could scramble
around and work until then they had a
second review on the Friday and each
forgiving students and members but were
people that faculty people are aware
with a bust and then people who were
totally dealing for the situation hey
this is seminars is oppressive urban
planning procedures newman problem
situations of the day which happened
actually three times I think Anderson
Newton and breelan environmental control
the one of the things that happened in
Berkeley is that the whole question of
services of buildings mechanical and
plumbing had been transformed into a
notion of something it was kind of
calculate funny boat but without to make
something in the heart of Korea process
and Marie Mel um at comes of organ he
said course of given a graduate student
minus two at Berkeley he had previously
Kevin mechanical engineering degree he
also had been setting some of the
evolving of computer things there which
is why he actually was in the previous
case cuz he was actually close at that
time to Chris Brown
working with with a computer system
environment roles have got seminars
twice I think with Raylan mmmm and John
Fisher who came up who had been teaching
force there and Mary milz had been
teaching assistant and now since the
form i think there were two or three of
those million newton an early history
theory millen composition pervade grade
design matikas related problem five
fisher design process had announces new
and it's making a problem solve and
guilt current work but refresh token
rhythm and john fisher short lectures by
a new york city project that Stan gave a
Harlan project which is a matter of
preference of convection that later time
current works by system
grave and the ark city project of grave
first of that work for da that year and
both in Missoula and habitat 67 which
did Ram heart and I just hired the
faculty had work done something so that
off top down can America
so the food I propose is that lady mark
ronson back and I say a few things are
little saucer or target supplementary
and then maybe okay oh it was cognitive
to the floor soon as possible
grady-white I thought you hated it
suppose if I mother's going to miss you
think part of it but Michael microphone
is one
but the wasteland cultural wasteland
that was prevalent that Simon that got
me so to the painting of it and mcdonald
in senate and maybe are correct me on
this little bit but i thought it'd be
good to a little may be contacted
conversationally very much about the
15th and the opportunity that was
developed by the 60s by young
enterprising minds and we sometimes
forget that in if you were to compare
with today however it was the type of
open IT was a a title open indian
bracelet it wasn't that there is a waste
under which there could be a lot of
opportunity to do things as well as and
the open up what is the status of modern
architecture if we think of our Meredith
curriculum you know our to self-induce
know so glad you lated type of privilege
that we have today you know these things
didn't exist in the 50s and your sixties
I don't know when they became you know
what we are today which is we talked
about you know we weren't that wrong
little bit but there's something you
know especially to my tea which was so
particularly exciting so my gear is a
baked apples or school you know from the
1880s onward 1890s for sure with the
login
pradel up until 1940s IM Pei came to MIT
because this was the place where he
could learn voiceover I mean I didn't
come here for modernism and we sort of
have to remember that in my T's
transition to modernism was very
different from the institutions that
will remain nameless that became more
famous and so MIT there was a type of
lag type of confusion the type of
interrogation if your element Lawrence
Anderson became a head here I was in 37
I think when when he arrived that was an
impetus came in 49 I was sort of the
beginning of the type of conversation
about modernism and it so Devon sort of
slow form Kepesh kidneys classes were
student said to make paper or objects
and so certain types of modernist
designing exercises and then was the
period nativities where people were
coming in wine fuller came in 52 showing
up was floating around calm 56 and then
said Maurice lift him in that are 52 and
then he went back home then he was
brought back by volusion when he became
when he came here in six and then some
of the 60s there was a sort of this
whole strange group of people by who you
know looking around a young comment not
breathe form getting
in traditional way there was no will
mandate from outside to act like an
institution and so there was a moment in
a time when what we think in challenged
the norm in the dorm was you know in
some sense so up the street and to also
when capilano came round there a little
uncertain committed 16 sometimes these
and that created a sort of a divided you
can different types of modernism right
or were they so the more informal model
his own lists together and do things
with student activism urban activism
that with the cattle out which was more
formal patrol big-time type of thing and
voice with certain go she s a split in
his hands and when I was talking with
Mari Smith and he still he doesn't call
Catalano not only causing the fascist
and in other word for you know I could
we go out there who is one you friend of
the baddest
so there's a lot of attention you know
between you know what words you know the
direction for architecture a very core
in fundamental way and in sometimes I
think what we're seeing here these
presentations is that how case in some
sense trying to sort of articulate a
response she was to several types of
modernism there's you know there's a
post-war professional there was a sort
of a high modernism of gropius and me's
and it was you know what I call
monumental modernizes if you will that
was emerging and filling in a type of
needs looking for alternatives to this
people is so we went to the core core
party I thought I were just sort of
collision of that perhaps putting up to
institutional history because I think
its little brother just business but
Ashley Lawrence Anderson has been here
since 1936 and was head of the design
program almost all the time and then
there then the architecture department
Oh indeed he also in what 38 designed
the other night swimming pool which was
a very fun an example of modern
architecture and the institution had
committed to I know that unfortunate was
grooving in one of this firms later
buildings which has the shadow on to the
beautiful sunny space um the he was a
great wonderful teacher who supported
people and made way for them but also
when werster when he was being was very
very effective at reading people in Game
Commission for modern acquisition we
have an alto building that's because of
bill worship and yeah right well no it
also is paper huh p bro yeah so he went
never more on tribal mercer making a
team of his faculty and make a building
so those were really fine good strong
example of modern architecture that was
not doctrinaire like some of the street
and show different kinds of modernist
not as a programmatic the same thing but
just because they were sponsoring things
by people were thinking of life in your
place dad one more thing about that hit
my team he wishes the great technical
university is dream home or him so had
to do with rocket Liam radar because I
got out of the articles I promise I've
been
science I promise so with the end of the
war we had my strawberry institution is
very important scientists and engineers
that they also have developed a
conscience but what have we done what if
sites because we have to make sure that
the students we train kept this should
be disparate education in the arts and
humanities and so the beginning of the
humanities program here the being of the
Arts program here of that partner but
also the worst would be so much a
sympathetic figure that the Opera
building coming to chapel and the
restrainer price is that they're
responding the idea that if you be are
you being environment so I'm going to
try out a proposal especially a sermon
because I'm hearing it kind of emergent
than ever seen or problematic that I
mean I think there's a risk of some of
these things started to fly apart you so
much information and so many diverse
things but I'm actually hearing some
coherence but also the both was
motivated for a different reason which
is to defeat the dichotomy that I heard
emerging in the first session the
dichotomy between the formal and the
social dimension of architecture and I
know that the dichotomy is going to be
increased in the next panel when we talk
about the whites and grays it is kind of
sort of polarized but but I'm actually
try to defeat that that economy they
still some of the things that that had
been said this afternoon um and I'm also
thinking at the same time about the
legacy of case and one of the things
that I look for my home
experience at MIT central later I don't
know when exactly you start talking
about semi autonomy the concept of
Simeon Tony but this was a big concept
when Renaud was first year in the late
be getting the late 70s it comes partly
Stanford mentioned being attracted early
to Karl Popper but a kind of footage as
Karl Popper order in may lack Akash was
someone who was equally maybe even some
ways more important for San and
Macintosh has the concept of a research
project which is this intellectual
project that we've been talking about
this intellectual cognitive architecture
could be modeled on that their tests on
the one hand an internal history which
is made up of its own sort of autonomous
structures and conventions but also what
we in contemporary terms my comment
disciplinary history or internal history
to the project but it also has an
external history and those new histories
interact sometimes happiness feelings
sometimes smoothly sometimes mom
synchronously sometimes they line up but
there's an interaction so hits I think
see me I'll family which is by the way
very different my students to hear
al-jazeera also uses the term signal
Tommy but that's not what's then myth I
think and singing up homie Tamika starts
to give us a way of talking about the
formal and social together as darlin I
think he should work very much did at
cinnamon and I heard that we've got her
dichotomy emerging this morning I think
the
concept of sin yo Tommy defeats the
other thing that I think I was looking
this is a very I think minor part of the
archives that we looked at that I was
struck mr. Stan's knows it'll very
unfinished but it's a proposal for a
seminar next year of the topics
iconology and what do people respond to
universally that that the universally
person really really surprised me I
think Stanwood would not would not think
like that later that someone that you
that there was a universal response but
I was trying to think it also iconology
this is not a concept that we I think at
least not at Harvard maybe your best
evocative here from an auskey and I was
trying to think what can hold together
what kind of idea can hold together a
notion of universality of the spots the
universal disposition or universal
reaction and also high chronology which
is a very controversial which was a
controversial concept in artistry from
the no stupid because it involves not
not individual response but it kind of I
would even call it a deep structural
conditions more than just looking at I
could not sorry I colonies more than
looking at iconography as a symptom I
phonology is actually kind of a deep
structural condition and what I want to
propose and this is I guess I propose
the question I think some notion of
structure was starting to emerge early
early 63 64 65 structure in the sense
that on the one hand the structure of
architecture the one hand architecture
has an internal coherence an internal
ordering system in internal disciplinary
history on the other hand and look at
their okay intensive and extensive space
on the one hand it has an internal
structure but it also produces effects
but also that is they have intensive as
the kind of internal organization of
architecture exits it is its external
effects will be one way of reading that
but also it can respond to external
effects but it responds as architecture
it responds as of autonomous organizing
system eponymous mode of thought and I
think the only thing to me that one of
the things that would hold together a
lot of these diverse teams would be some
emergen ocean structure and then another
thing also in this ocular dominance
description of this sort of peripatetic
architecture this architecture they look
money you have to bodily move move
through it draws in different vectors of
wind and Sun climatic factors
geographical factors of two different
material instructional factors but it
brought it in as architecture it it
wrecked it it organizes all these
divergent conditions as architecture
unfolding in time
as you walk through it I think that's
kinda it's got to be structured again
that holds all those things together
anyway and I think I know structure of
something for you standard cut certainly
comes later but I'm an argument that was
the emergent even it may be case 335 I'm
also reminded that it even if you don't
think it was it doesn't doesn't mean
nature of the idea of structure would
not it wouldn't matter if you disagreed
or not
well talk about the sum of your holiday
that person something that I did pursue
this is some energy and some hormones I
never get free into the form that i
should have talked to and i agreed so
often because i think it is important i
do it in whatever steam of it you're
great it goes back to me we're not
really deserted with the problem with
the world is so simple we we have quite
properly ambitions to ideal conditions
and technology correct form of things
but they would also have to deal with
the reality of how how come fix our
techniques of making things or
indirectly with them they like it and it
doesn't it doesn't come together also
eating so the idea of semi got finally
sarah wedding was here in gave a lecture
users who the last year and she's it
range to the idea economy but trying to
keep from falling into all the classes
or that usually advise and looking for
the way which is part of the most
complicated part fisher so chic kind of
excited by my cochlea common ideas and
then simple dirt you know he's been hard
for her has been hard for me to get
because is there's so much attraction
for polar positions in suggesting
assembling the interact noble this to
happen to this menu this here ID up here
i'm not sure i remember when that came
however their opinion but I don't you
don't you just result in seminar so it
probably does show something about
underlying creating conditions but it's
not something that I know is about a big
money but will they know you get some
parked cars and extracurricular global
architecture one of those things is to
understand with intelligence and simply
all the differences of different
cultures and they are kinda Billy mate
but the fact that we can buy basis I
think we can also develop a very deep
sympathetic understanding of things for
what they are physically don't
necessarily have to have that ecology in
that kamagra p of buildings over the
room Chris recognize their ingenious
what is so that something may be more
maneuvers electrical I think your other
you're right Michael I may I think uh
you know that's why i thought you know
that bring in the 50s interesting
because how many honest i'm wrong i mean
because i'm just so resourceful
you know you know yeah we sort of are
autonomous at those committee and
something that different people have
arbitrary thoughts you know that that
comic geek because that's what they do
right and maybe he and then someone else
sounds like this is no coherency there
right and in some sense i think case was
a protest against both of those anything
everyone's hands to the soda type of
modernism were taught us that there's
also the big personality of modernism
Idi Amin or to my backyard or I'm going
to this site and support life which was
seemed to me because of Timothy plays a
very instrumental wonderful in many ways
bartenders and characters that would put
it on every right and and there were
people who so push this but it's still
laugh to type all petals and I think the
fullness in a year or any income from
the case people like this or desired of
my heart after returning to a type of
meaningfulness mycoplasma serum and ii
complex reaction too many things i was i
would say that any of the examples I
cited were arbitrary for meeting with no
no I'm not talking about I'm to talk
about big house or the time I see their
orbit or none same as individual
statements they had resonance but you
know convenience arning concerning and
alto end all add up to a bit dodgy but
actually
it is true it was a fundamental
difference between werster and Andy in
the less assertive way was that the last
thing you wanted was to have the
doctrine yeah that was absolutely
immersed rejecting that would govern was
written for years and her foot and I'm
good but I wanted to leave i might just
in this lecture thing prob it seems
seemed us that seems mean that the
structures which are really important or
ones that give an order to one's
thoughts and logical thinking is part of
the ways but that are accommodating of a
counterpoint of practicality of that
kind of a kind of point of action
counterpoint of absorbing different
influences being in some some creative
tension with each other and then that
also operates at different scales that
you can see it happening within the
building beauty of happening with the
different complex you can see it
happening within a building in small
parts oh and one of the things actually
stand i meant to bring you must have it
in your files of a thing i came across
your initial photo above the exhibition
in and it is very eloquent about how one
of the things that's going to make can't
use your terminology book but they but I
rather be eloquent about how it was
going to make people alert to the
intricacy of indigenous basis of the
engagement with things which were small
as well as things which were larger and
Mestral did well sweets but there's a
graduation Matt Cail and that seemed
very important and was one of the things
actually that the MIT lofty practicums I
think that's the trick where one of the
things that happened what I arrived is
that the previous term group wasn't more
classic people somebody else's at build
a mezzanine nvidia one of the documents
and it was hard out by building apart
and that had been quite mad and so when
I arrived a little early in the summer I
was taken aside by a group of students
for dinner nice dinner and full the
story and said and so what are you going
to do about it because we're gonna build
another one and so I went on the bubble
federal pen and one of the things we
have been interested in number of days
trying to Tom what really are the
interactions between people so I wrote
up a proposal for a space use laboratory
and presented it to Jerry
return and saying that this was a place
with something they could the minute
they could evaluate it they can see how
it affected other people and learn all
kinds of things by doing this and done
and had a process a teacher to the
faculty member a member of the building
department in the student and David
approves what was proposed um and weezer
green he was very bad I got a call one
day at other end of campus by the
faculty member said you better come here
and there's a why and to wealth we've
approved plan and vomits create know you
better come here and find me after
several treaties I came back across the
campus to the sound of the sledgehammers
and dust and the studio is so big torn
apart and it took some time for the
creative energies to overcome what had
been the destructive of rebellious
energy but yeah and then became
something
we came as we now say viral and at one
point all the studio 10 mezzanine build
structures in them and eventually there
was one authorized by the president made
out of us to be in the main lobby and
come up with a pro over the second floor
so it received a kind of your agents
city can come here yes yes
yeah that's not just just for a couple
of questions a question
I really appreciate it started I really
appreciated the recording of the
discussion of discipline sort of the
formation of the intellectual discipline
was talking about but it seems that in
the way that it's constructed through
where you're just showing someone about
the use of space and bodies in this
relationship between environmental
bodies but counterpoint to intellectual
this is like rationality and curious if
that construction of the discipline was
being done so that you can play in or
create a productive friction between
architectures of disciplining other
disciplines kemah ties back to the
question velicity didn't get to ask last
time about the role of social sciences
so I'm curious for example in that
Stacie's laboratory was the fourth
member or member of another faculty
psychology or sociology apologies were
these connections were you trying to
establish these kind of connections in
pedagogy coming from there was earlier
disciplinary deception no in the case
that spaces laboratory we didn't invent
probably a mistake I must say that the
the specific careful observation that
a neighborhood place and that party they
like and follow up on my heart but also
was people were getting them out of
something else that was much more
important to them on the other hand fans
construction in page whether drivers
took many of those same ideas emerge
during that period work with them
working very disciplined way it was a
very carefully chosen cereal and set up
with a real rationale about how that
meant together a rationale that did not
in fact as far as I know preclude um
we've actually gone a little bit over
time so I'm going to end it here outside
forget it come back attendance
you
