[Applause]
as the story goes was horn we have to
swim in advic that according to French
anthropologist when a jihad a crowd
gathered around addicted and threw
stones it was probably her while she
danced on the ground desperately trying
to protect the head the installation of
stones over the crouching body a shape
to the third the sacrifice the tomb and
the monument were all produced in the
same app at the myth of origin of
civilization the second pivot the
conscious act of replicating the shape
of the first is at the middle of the
origin of architecture this construction
they have been enacted without the fire
oh but it didn't otherwise state labor
depletion of Natural Resources and
importantly the violence of ministers
architecture is the second finding it is
borne out of the second pyramid but the
conscious act of people whether by beep
Island the same stones in a pile ear or
work for permanence terracotta or by
replicating performs somewhere else with
different stones the second permit for
the first architecture it is therefore
inherently as the title of this
conference suggests deconstruction as
fibers the cinematic act thus conscious
copying violates the authenticity of the
original wife this is a distancing it
and may be venerated the disturbs labels
both natural order between the
originating idea and the original
maximization of this idea no wonder
those artists we man would imitate that
nature had to be managed from his
Republic is seen but today in Aleppo
with so much a building and republican
needed the artists are being lured back
to the city Republic and boy what a
republic has become that famous city of
stone has been turned into the city of
snowing there is actually a parallel
across filming direction at the origin
of the city that is important one this
way
the first city as the story goes was
built over the rubble of the first human
settlement the pattern is the same
across this open taenia and the city of
nasty weather the settlement itself was
pulled over or burned or abandoned and
public because the second
[Music]
over the first had committed me over the
centuries created large house that the
seven things that stood up against the
horizontal expansion like a cotton
fields and desert some of these
abandoned sites are actually called
division the Highlands other ones are
for tennis or is the temp which
constitutes the core of many of the
historic cities in the region is but the
illumination of problem over trauma
partly others were three walls partly
out of self-renewal or is it collective
atonement what is it
this lack of got acceptance of tense
persists today in the region against the
scroll of urbanization and mr. stark the
most prominent and preamble about tennis
remains the problem you can see all the
way from here from the solution critical
distance that the program has
strategically established and nurtured
to predict the study situations like an
Air Force reconstruction we are able to
ask important questions
thanks to this distance about the
ethical practices in math practices of
the construction about the rights of
citizens engaged or emerging from
underneath the vision about the two
years and violent virtues of origins and
authenticity about the role of
architecture and about the underlying
entanglements between architecture
cities and for providing the critical
distance and thank you to the guest
speakers for helping us imagine less
violent origins and better futures
