you
Oh surely we produce Giancarlo exactly
behalf of our
it immediately that
I will officially return oh no oh we met
in Spain in Spain I was doing as a
journalist I need to be in a Congress in
Pamplona and the worst like let's say
off of age in the Congress one where
physical crisis Limburg Kurt as a
demurrer on wealthy people parsimony oh
and after me that Congress was the
younger emerging generation who I was in
charge to have a conversation and part
of that was are availa I was Musante
I forget basically I remember I know
what are anonymous that's something she
should include the parentheses of our
caliber that wasn't four years ago this
is then we'll be crossing our lives very
very often anyway if you all know his
work so this evening it in terms going
to speak as part of the our lecture
series experience in architecture
manty as you know is based in Bogota
Colombia with a MIDI in having the last
several years become symbols of how
architecture can transform a city not
only physically but socially made moved
by politicians whose main aim was to
transform the city from violence to
labor boat
Tanis focusing on top finest police use
of human limbs of a harbor the mayor in
Medellin mm these politicians finance
Public Works infrastructure and
architectural projects much of the
change in cities or cooled through
architectural projects especially
silicon public facilities including
parks libraries schools sports it is
practical interesting to think about
experiments at the scale of the city
where experimental architecture become a
mode of actually using creating
extraordinary projects for the most
humble of structures and facilities in
economic
in this context Chicago has been active
agent this was done through competitions
and collaborations this open attitude
towards how architects work together
Masami has transformed major cities in
Colombia through his acts of
architecture
she also has worked with more over than
50 architects in the last 20 years
and together with politicians forming
architecture culture of collaboration
this is a specific method of getting
permissions through public competitions
and the need for architects to always
sweat it and form new collectors to
complete projects of different programs
scales that require different expertise
though of course the relationship of
politics and architecture this
partnership can play out in numerous
ways but in Colombia in the recent years
it has been remarkably poly a positive
and generous we are going to think of
ourselves as politicians due to the
great work produced in C tonight the
definitions and practice - James
something spoke speaks about his work as
poise choice of learning through playing
for the value of playfulness in the
construction of the society and
his offices and he looks for develop our
develops or their nominee as a catalyzer
new relationship today Vasanti asked us
to visit some of the labs that use these
and hopefully he will explain us
producers I can give small video details
of his practice but basically I think
it's really bad to remark that he has
been delegated Lobby DN a-- testing
quite small university and he has won
several prizes in common architecture
biennale
there are many convene on a specific
clinical work this one American are I
mean prices you know the exhibition me
and Alice that I can think of Quito to
Paris your work is in MoMA I mean what
else
please welcome each other on Sunday
okay thank you for deputation and I've
got two to show the project and this
electrode is dividing through parts and
I go to this this electricity doesn't
your party I think differently first
part is how we work that is a political
position we want to work in the country
the second part is about what is the
interest we have a little English two
years ago and I think I maybe need help
to appreciate to the Sun works how do we
work the last year we have worked it in
the femoral 57 different steam marketed
or another first offices of sociology or
another another team generally in the
studio for acids are very important how
we can work with Tocantins we want to
learn of order we don't want to do a
magical potential and for us it's a very
important to go with other heaters and
other forms to approach to think that is
appropriate for us the most important
nerve and project that is the question
when we start to do apply what we want
to learn what we want to do what we want
to understand in this case from the home
probably have have worked in the last
series about - the competition's
probably primarily going to show this
bed for a competition or is made for the
foundation we think that this is the
only possibility to the march of the
people can to access to do a public
project and we have an important law in
Colombia public building you have to
make the competition will trigger the
discussion about the innovation you can
open new forms to approach that we think
that is the only possibility democratic
to do that a lot of people or people in
solution and it is a challenge every
time you need to challenge what you
think that we need to to think other
folks too and again is important because
the expert
bringing this game well what in 30 cells
you know I have three little consider I
don't you show the difference to them
what do you that particular this action
for us this the value that particular is
not in itself only that is the real
target that we want to understand around
to that particular we want to understand
the capacity performative capacity of
the architecture we can trigger your
relationship to behave or we want we are
interested about today what happened
with the anomaly in the space of what
can trigger this anomaly in the cave of
the people that is the Journal of the
approach that we have what we did last
year
this is a beautiful that the work they
have a small for this is a symbol a visa
is a work of their artist Mexican artist
and a little ways and we we put together
this somewhere we have to speak because
remove this this this toll is a total
forty to forty communication if you see
this on where will we put that we have
to speak together to move whatever and
that's a good example
what is not interested in a particular
in this case how we can trigger all the
relation with the community embracing or
other forms to to work in this case we
have working in the general with exactly
a particular is a social inclusion
we are resting on the world of studying
the price in the last year word where do
we work it we have working in the last
year in the sixth in the series of
Columbia and we think that they are
particular is a tool for social
inclusion and to help two people to live
with these very poor terms in general
that I have talked before in the class
the social is not only working with the
Polli
with a neighbor important the social is
family because everybody speak now about
the social was only for the poor people
know you can do socially the Grammy
Museum work without a difference for
what we what you can trigger in the
relation and the social oh you can put
different social accumulation whenever
interest to think the architect Lisa my
material practive we are interesting
about the cocoa the behavior of the
motive for the form of the geometry we
want interesting the diagram assisting
action
this in this case my wife contracted
with an operation operation of systems
or how we can do architectural finishes
for the funicular control but if they
will be aware of the piece of memory of
the Challenger
we have argued ironically of the model
of the system more than finished
unclosing architect on will propose the
development of open and advocacy system
compulsory models and then project of
Association capable of adapting to
diversity - it turns anything into it
what we have working I want to show
difference for the paperboard existing
and the capacity to grow or to change in
the time like this changing how we can
see that the architectural more here
today strategy not know we are we are
interested work in this way we think
that this article is not to design is
more to the faith Omega or technical is
a form to think support to produce thing
we support to produce and ps4
more strongly and we are working with
this idea of the job-relevant receive
the invention versatility grow that
ability and we have classified the
project in six different classification
not food for because we are one to
classy because if I the product with is
more particular lecture or for
displaying the different spray that we
have did in the last year with we have
an interest to do price or landscape or
continental Akita bro power bro colors
women it's a form to spray similar to
two bodies explain did not run the
traditional landscapes and topographies
controls automatics wrong patters models
and other that assistant and activities
and identities they still obtain an
environment in general what we do wanna
go to explain now the landscapes what we
want that to work with any of the
landscape or the topography in this case
more technical in 2008 we had to develop
landscape related to the urinal gravels
and to progress in this game they are
interesting to this software and beyond
the object in that in the landscape we
want to work with Italy of the landscape
hold on did it work can be more near to
the landscape of the LAT form styling
we are warned here in this approach will
speak about with the natural contract a
natural relation between identity in
this case I got to show them partly
buried spanning a medium he is a
competition won this competition
this project is many many it is a long
valley between two big mountains I said
it's exceeding the wonders in Colombia
and when in the end is Montes and German
oh we won't work it in this case we want
to work with this and vehicle and scale
what we don't want to approach object
properties we want to more believe in
the landscape with abl the counters on
the landscape in this case we mark it in
this with any of the students tract for
you technically we are all we can
okay we can to work with any fear of the
landscape we don't want to do a bit they
talk about of the landscape we want to
have a relationship with this idea of
the moment we don't want to
representation the mountain we want to
work with it to operate how operate the
landscape this is idea of the model is
the mountain this is the first model the
competition that we have working in very
poor never is
the principle center of operator
of the scholar and the people to live
here in the brain medicine is the case
because nobody want to say I lived there
for many many years maybe this is an
element of the narco traffic on the
balance now the English is another
affirmative indication and notice this
case delivering disability the political
approach of the mayor another you run
Tony political this is a measure of the
library any of the opening of the
topography of the landscape in the body
of many in and you can see this in this
picture this is at the other how we can
change what think the people to live in
this neighborhood
now this this place changed not only for
the library
another approach of the European
approach but the people change one thing
about to itself in this case because the
people that have a embracing about gap
the people to be ok and able to live in
this in this neighborhood say a little
parable is this library these memory
disabilities this change of the city and
disability another another political
talk a medium is made another second of
eight important average but this is
maybe the point to show what
transformation DC I don't ensure the use
of the interview with the people or what
think the people about to present or by
having after to laitanan
I thought you could the video because
it's very long and we don't have a long
time for them for show
I didn't to provide wood into a wine
we may as campaign I was at the landfill
that was to determine because the soil
is Enough Project request
muy bonita muy bueno para todo para la
la Bonita a moment reluctant sure
we're looking for saying anything is
beneath you can be impressive we put it
in a certain temperature position to us
we have desire God can give in to the
operator
this is the location of the plan of the
of the location of the library directly
issue the brace is long-term this in
this case the neighborhood and this is
project is part of the order your web
connection in the different place of the
neighborhood is 37 this project is part
of day of the boy pretty good monitoring
I can periodically check mark Normand
project and this is the part of the
country basically this is part of the
visibility of this more urban
information in why is the information of
the in general this is the library and
this leverage connect with the cable of
the Metro in the body and this is a very
important because this is the form to to
connect project
we may need a dispute their army is 13-3
the program is one program and they are
they are the competition I asked one
building and we break the body because
we want to multiplies the time of the
use of the larvae in we want to use this
24 hour and you see the people to give
30 people go out to work 7:00 in the
morning and come back selling the net
and you're on the library's closed when
they arrive
how can you this difference the part of
the language in different standard
authorities when they need the library
is open in different times and the touch
worlds of the another and other music in
this case in the end is nothing that
really smart the cultural center the
people in this place that people can go
there to learn order behave other other
of the words and other and iPhones to
that intersection the possibility to
entry in different times from this door
or connection with the platform the
ground for cycles of the library the
relation of silence I mean we don't want
to have a big view of the city everybody
to live a very happy one the beauty we
want to share and do another
we want to claim of July
ServiceNow equal sign is impersonating
people to go round to his every time
it's impossible to this is the idea of
the mountain to the Jabra came to
politically or the people call them that
I we go out of the earth and his partner
whose idea of the mountain of the earth
this is the place Oh
I'm going to show what is the impact of
the library and the poor in the
population of Neverhood very fast is not
but change of the shape of me what I
think the people provide for what what
think the people to itself the the grace
of the of the balancing neighborhood I
hope them home to States useful order
population from three different words
inside the library now is a symbol of
the city this is a tourist point this is
important the tourist point change the
economy of the neighborhood the open
restaurants opening bars of affinity oh
we can clear that or we can trigger the
it hasn't changed in the narrative the
poor you know I think is the final
target this book right for the Spanish
writer about today he's too into to jump
people to live in very poor neighborhood
does in the history of the library I was
a beautiful because after a dust of that
would start a foundation about about
music and hip-hop in this case it is
very beautiful the deform around to this
very start new and other forms to to
foundations and the people to connect
image throughout I'd like to show
another and over classified as a row
compilers we have interests irritant all
public and growth come to can it can be
to attack attack tablet adapted in
journal how we cannot go can think
product with the parties of Malaysia is
an abstract organization with an
exceptional system I can we can think
the finishing project
we can another first to grow in the time
to assist my knees respond with ink or
we have
instruction can give you structure to
work with their particular I don't
design the building I think is
destruction and I can but if capacitive
and the building can grow and
adaptability the chemical to show now
the sport Hall in the melody as it's
another competition we were officially
maybe to Tommy hey girls this is a
disability - but is it an honorary
difference playfulness means the body is
a very consolidated place in journal we
want working with another plantation to
the whole organizer duplication and the
growth of the plantation and the
capacity of the plantation to grow in
the time the Pacific - occupies the
territory when ideal of the world for
this this Rose come to grow in two
different to add the first sketch of the
project the form of the project is
product of the laundry what what is the
town high for that to grow a different
sense this is the first product within
in general and this is the form to grow
this project we can do two or three
sport halls or the fourth or horse test
they refer to the countries that
Colombia we don't have maybe the money
toward to towards force called hold four
or five for the applicable project we
can see the model of the system and the
piece
we do fix piece and you can see the
finished product and you can work with
the community and you can have two tools
support for them connect with the
community and ended up on you when you
have a more money you can grow the
product that is important for us I'm in
the index and only 30 is death or they
out food and I go to speak about very
fast about that this is the model of the
competition and this is the place if the
place is a traditional sport place for
therefore in Latin America this time
Union difference what facilities around
we have the interest in this case -
Olivia of the continent culture that we
the competition asked to do for
different sport facilities we want to do
one big Coliseum what one because the
whole world is for the sport when the
possibility to break a bill in
difference in different style that is
the place of the city is between two
little hero
for the collective for people in Nevada
like and this is the image of the
competition have the relation around
many of the other topography the corner
of the of the roof is near to the a of
the color of the city and this is the
image of the problem this competition
that's America pretty terrific for me
because when you think when you work
within the octave of the instructional
day or the week when you don't think to
the building is finished
every time this this graph can this
music what this pattern can grow when
you want is no is not producing the
determines Purdue because we have a 3
here and we have to stop their operation
of this of this of this system in
general and we did for sport this sport
we didn't do because because it's mainly
for them for the people of they are
receiving and I have in terms for that
because I give you
to the cities and I give to my clients
the possibility to continue to grow the
product that they meet there today I
give you an instruction and you can
develop and you can do that is in the
end isn't that I have interests in this
case another in another way
will they be able to play who they play
who think the tourists I don't know but
how instruction and everybody
retaining have renamed the buildings in
this case this is more near to the other
operative approach we are now working
around all around the idea of the play
of the anomaly of the behavior we can
open the possibility to use the
buildings don't think the Dublin is
every time the result of the of the
deficient the efficiently and how we can
work with this approach to to trigger
over behavior and not relation inside
the distance and this in the space this
is a different approach about to the
toil of the play and
but what do we want to trigger in this
case in general the sport facilities is
closed for any value you cannot see
inside and you can do not use inside the
disc or facility because it's a for the
hybrid teacher we propose to decision to
open and close different stores and
different neighborhoods of the city of
the public of the sports facilities for
the possibility to use the people of
dynamic of the neighborhood and when you
see the people go there to dancing to
sing into the comical competition or
play or the jump people displaying
basketball amenities within for
difference Collison to new policy and
ability we have worked with seven
different roof and seven different piece
and we can put this piece in particular
a or we and with that we can have many
many different possibilities to put
together with the seventh piece this
game is the difference piece working
together and another approach important
for us in this case is who what produced
the form of the product of the sport
building Journal is the result of the
form of the field we want to break that
another sport facilities well what the
work time and we want to trigger more
child in this case Romanian and this is
day for the people use the space public
space around of on between of the
difference collisions we want to break
this through what what what we wanted to
do another form of the building not
another result of the of the problem of
the form of the field in this case this
is the difference personality to go up
or go bro brow of the inside surely now
is a chromatic approach I don't mean air
conditioned on it we have a wonderful
weather in general and another report
for us very important is how we can see
inside what we do in general the public
buildings of four corners or building is
closed word for the people I want to two
trillion gap how we can feel the side of
the building how we can think that the
border of the will be more near to the
membrane no it's a result of the
the composition of the shadow or the
idea will do is motivate me of the code
for practical please understand that we
remember and we want to do your dad hope
we can all win termination what happened
inside on outside all the people walk or
not to see what happen inside and is I
think is importantly probably giving
opening and you need to see what happen
which is a totally building this is a
public building you need to open and you
have to be more democratic religion
between outside and inside nature happen
with a membrane of the border of the
product this is the inside of the people
looking my happen inside the building
and this is the image of the building
with nature and I'm going to
- Oh another classic classic fact of the
model consists in an active system - we
have a interest very similar predicted
to the last classified or we can grow
how we can do attacked active
architectural finishes were this is a
video possibility this is a match of the
of the little growth that we did in
Bogota the possibilities - - then I have
spoke before a nice project in the end
is to play this is this deform to play
with any of the Opera tonight
have another one
Oh
we are working with this idea of the
model at the facility to grow and I'm
going to show why we have
two months ago about to place on the
piece in this front possibility to grow
in this case this is another
configuration that you can do that as
the first sketch of the project and this
is the private build in this case we
have because we are - we are - with
we see no park with a little amusement
in emselves alternative means is that
the poor ability
yes master yes never I guess it was okay
in this in this case this place is how
we have very interesting the situation
before them we need this canopy the
people can cannot go out after to the
seventh of the night in this place now
it is a place of conservation the people
the difference gets to live in the
neighborhood don't go to this place and
this place is interesting because the
people can either until 11:00 12:00 is a
very very danger in this another
difference violence very different
values for Ganz and the people news is
canopy for this board for the market for
different activities in this this is a
very usual in the general the people do
a canopy similar to this to this world
in this world I think this is the forum
and the possibility of the world I think
is the difference to connect with people
to breath in the journal in this case
and already mentioned of the projects of
time you can see very solid to build in
another moment you can see very transfer
in the building I like that because you
can have a different approach and use
building doesn't neighborhood is a very
very poor
learn to show another president new
melodrama meeting him is is here and it
is part of the classified of the waters
116 is another competition that we won
two years ago and then this is the
catalogue of the pieces of the model and
the possibility to come to attachment
aggregate the difference building in
this case but have the possibility grow
in these cases and other configurations
the pleasure of the competition is our
learned unlearn our together to the
airport immunity and we want to propose
developed Rome but possibility to grow
and put another piece of this of this
part to connect this is the the
structure of the building the building
structure of the luminous is there is
work with any of the wick Elaine is
engineer French attorney and he named
the structure of the of the of the the
bass drum is a raw batter and this is
the continuation the wing configuration
but here is the shop truck the truck is
here but this is the real configuration
of the problem to design it in this case
we work with three different supports we
put the problem the problem of the
erosion we do a public event plastic
Plaza over the problem in this case and
we proposed a model model fencing of the
page is go down the building is go down
and we can use in this case the the
stage of the public release we don't use
very high competition in this candy see
the structure and the scheme is this in
the different piece of the building and
the model of the world this is they have
to this point than this point have 45
mirrors in this to think of the
difference this is the boil the will
model the structure is transparent this
is the draw of the competition of the
different role put together in this case
is in the
imagine sanguinist down the border of
the buildings of the fashions this is
another image outside of the the valley
this is how the differences texting that
we use in this case this is the
topography and the possibility to the to
the people going back to cold and
tricycle when wrong we want in this case
to worry on the retina this is the very
strong this is totally designed for the
product for the Spanish engineer born
from partial partial owner and then it's
very interesting because this piece have
$45 is respect
support what is with this is convinced
what we wanted to give in this case we
want to put little difference behave
activities are around to the world and
we have innovation for number up for the
back row signal sharp edges are for the
people by bicycle came for that
difference activity we want to put many
children's activity about what we can go
women dollars under the principle and we
can have open close between not only for
that for that very high competition in
this case is the possibility to movement
in the park and this is another the
first the first draw of the competition
and this is the final image in this
building in Kerry is going to
and we are going to start the
construction of the building this is the
draw of the of the Indian heritage is a
very beautiful draw the video is not
good video but you can understand better
this page let me see
isn't that will be there but you can
understand with video how go down the
facade this is the connection with a
platform facility to move the platform
the fashion is go down open every every
space and you can see inside what
happened and this one is go down this is
necessary so they can't call them but if
you go down and this is the models and
difference am i don't we show the last
project this is a previous verses we see
destruction this is another particulate
e to finish it connection and in the
world we want to understand how we can
analyze grow and grow finishes and
connection this idea of this is under
Department immediately near two million
is a little the town imperative and this
is the river to come to connect the
place of day of the prairies in the
bottom of the scale this is the
possibilities of this idea of the models
connection difference
another project possibility grown to
this case and difference configuration
what we wanted to do when were when he
of the
domestic activities of the public space
generally developed in frigid have a big
relation with with the natural with the
flowers we get and we want to put this
idea in inside the inside of the
building and this building they have one
two three four three four scratch rules
for teacher teachers there were
different vision in Antioquia but we
want to use the public space with the
displaces and connection for the new
regulation that we want to work inside
of the room for our right to the other
part of the city unconditional a
statement after that but for us the most
important is we want to put inside of
this building of the board avoid we want
to put the difference tool on the Nexus
to how the people can exchange flowers
exchange difference force to change this
project you have to provide this part of
the city you have to walk inside you
have to offer to have to write for
another another way that this is a more
fast way and ideas to the people is
school okay many people can walk into
the middle of the school and we want to
work with this idea
with the difference on this is inside
the people go there are put in them but
much the magic the people can put in the
magic difference difference flowers or
plants or differences and you can change
that and you can go with them with the
maca and put them inside the displacer
do we want to trigger these any of the
domestic use inside the building in this
yes the the facade is not is not closing
so much aluminum match and the people we
want to trigger differentiate this is
the parts of the building the different
capsule of the with the program
possibility to walk and different
governance and possibility to difference
this is the model and this is the scale
to to go inside that is a possibility to
have a ladder to project films or this
is the really much it is the last image
this is the relation inside outside will
be match and possibly due to see inside
this professor teach me that this is
another probably under the environment
we have interesting to work with any of
the I mean what produce them we're going
to trigger difference form with it we
want to work with temperature with
colors with and
this is a true national chains for girls
malaguti attorney in Virginia we have a
working in many many another and I think
the page for them for for them for the
school so for the kindergarten they have
their work to trigger to teach this
little bit the spins can trigger the
possibility to in this case this is my
daughter and my daughter chase every
time they tricks and she customers and
they've changed the role every country
is learning of the robot yeah and we
want to do we want to do a project with
this idea we will stretch them out to a
possible history olive oil I have so
with the product who were they love the
finals and we have worked with is an
erupting feathers and this is this the
school this is the model of the school
this is the classroom around today party
to departure and the possibility to put
in the middle of the battle the infamous
this event was can the capacity capital
the capacity to change the robe of the
building and we are changing we are
telling the dress with this building
then the other inference is interval for
the exercise of NASA connect with the
difference classroom in this case what
we want the treaty we want to get
different how we have to teach to with
the architect alone today to the
children what is the see what is the
general
tiring the normal we took different
interests in Italy in favorites under
people who understand my habits at least
building when we put that this is the
fable there are the difference the
configuration of the space and this is
the possibility what we can do with this
building this is a discipline you can
you tell me the teacher can change the
facade they can change what happened in
saying in this building yeah we can in
general we don't change the dress of the
code in 20 minutes four years is not a
problem we can to protect another film
another respects this is the possibility
to change inside of the building we can
open every memory and we have we can we
can do here
one only space or differences makes a
difference to feel awkward cause over
context what what what what to do this
is the model of the project in Fable
another from Albania travelling during
off site in this case and this is the
very quality better image in Europe in
the end I wanted to explain the idea how
people come to possibility to grow and
change their catalog every time we have
a different tools and different approach
in this case thank you
anyways we'll be opening the floor to
questions
okay yeah question them particularly
especially the projects that you
mentioned that the way to deconstruct I
said is that it can actually grow and
then most of them are actually these
public projects and and also the fact
that you that's a question about okay
yeah you know what I asked the questions
about the projects that you
conceptualize as it being able to grow
and the fact that these are also public
projects right and you know there's a
kind of similarity with the kind of
Alison Peter Smith said projects when
they're dealing with public sector
projects as well where they also imagine
that things can grow over time and I
wonder what your kind of relationship is
with with the people who are with a
government or interlink that people who
are managing these public projects and
why you know whether you whether the
decisions in their part also make you
think that these are also projects that
could potentially grow over time that
you remain as a kind of architect years
yeah this product addition the other
project that we are working now with the
community we worked before with the
community we develop different strategic
with the community you know in Canada
and in Santa Marta in this case more
work with any of the grow when the
community yeah
you cannot go to the community to say
what they want when you go to work with
the community you can do - to discern
you don't go to say 21 everybody where
you go if you never do to say to speak
what you want people to our hair still
sucker or yeah you need to understand
with a speaking with people and
information is the most important when
you go and you you'll end up the
community at the community level with
you in this moment you can work with the
community this is very difficult
sometimes to work to see it but now we
are working more with the community in
other case if you usually everybody is
paid for the competition I mean you won
the competition and you cannot speak
before you have to
you keep your lecture passion a question
about the Pope course be kind of you
mentioned out this is a spot that gangs
don't touch Chris know why
because this place is now is a reference
of the neighborhood for that and for the
Hopi people use this place this space
really was plain English but I think
it's because the people have been crazy
and the people love this place
and they come there and they can't know
that this is place for everybody and
this reporter if you see in the in the
booth they have another campus pretty
simple chemicals very pretty and this is
a that is a detective a great place in
this case interview a woman speak that
is this this place continue to be not
the temperate and this is a very
important theorem in this place in the
border of the city I think it's product
embracing the people a proud of
I'm just curious because I don't know
the insight that your project is the
first public project in that
neighborhood right the library for this
done I believe in the canopy it seems
like that all these other sort of
fabrics that the cities through
sensitive it was it came out with
so maybe I don't know maybe there's
other public buildings there then I
don't know of so my question to you is
is there some kind of like when you
generate this kind of form for the
canopy for example also you're saying
that it really contains rock to the city
so I'm trying to think like how does
your idea of communication with the
community management or making as an
architect with that easily can be like
very diverse as well to make the city so
the city depending on the city but now
every year is a very important new
architect and they did a brain twister
project each other in Bogota is not
usually now maybe 20 years before in
hello sir another big approach a new
brand approach is he will change but he
is not only not vercinix in Colombia
opening volume with the complication
generally recovered deep project to the
community but in the end the governor
still have interest to give quality
properties put the school and did is
that is not the problem and discussion
may be nearing equal with with Fajardo
he is a son of huge and then the mayor
of the city kiss his Assam very romantic
I have convinced that if you have a big
role at the repatriation of the dual of
the relationship and very interesting
angle why produce market
we don't have relationship with it
apologies similar to the United States
the next thing what they when you go to
work in the studio okay let me just be
more specific about that cannot be
present then for example and okay by
having a canopy you provide a public
space for the community yes very
powerful now the menu sort of said that
it's gonna hang on when you showed the
photograph of the same module just keep
growing throughout so that public space
is not just a one kind of
- statement but it's throughout the city
now my question is is in the Osmo bone
of those kind of like joseline has to be
very more effective same system that
keep growing
how do you see that okay with with
models like the negative this particular
graph follows in this case is very very
strong because nobody are appropriate
here is a very very mention of the scene
space one is a patient in this case we
now we are wrong with border to connect
this treat with honor place order
relation in this case notice when I show
the array of you I showed possibilities
party started we are we are starting
because you there's a consistency to the
work in that you work with very clear
diagrams as you explained geometries
topologies we can put many words on to
that and yet you describe your work in
terms of behaviorism which links itself
to our kind of positivism
as if there is a scientific approach to
the way in which behavior may be
corresponding to form could you clarify
what that entails I mean historically
formalism has been in there way
disassociated with behaviorism but
you're bringing it back together I'm
just wondering how you repackaging that
for us they were of the form of sexual
have a relation with the biology if you
understand how operate geology biology
geology and you understand from operate
of the behavior of this geology and we
can understand for grow or what we
fortune remember and have another
project which we work without the middie
of the memories but it's not to
represent a theology is more what
operate how world
embracement not now I have to confess I
misunderstood completely what we were
saying before but it looks like you're
talking about behavior the behavior of
the form not the behavior of the
community no yeah it's a different
approach
for what else because they operate
effectively and I speak of the behavior
of the community when I speak of a
particular exaction okay when I play
nominee or the behavior of the people I
am interested to understand how this
pace to inform to behavior it's not the
control of the space I understand I
wanted to tell what happened which we
put here do in the middle of this space
and what happened with we see another
form how we can do the lecture talking
the middle of the space and you see the
determine I have to walk around with you
I mean they have another forms I speak
about it's not in this research and we
are interesting around to this approach
and I speak of the play of the form when
I speak about to the toys in this case
to motor system when I speak to the play
or toys the behavior is difference is
differentiable my question is do we need
to talk to a community to do
architecture for you understand is the
same when you go to see the place yeah
for me is not important who produced the
place the form of the belief for me is
more important when I go to work with a
community understand what happened what
is the behavior today we have exported
in the new class about these the people
to live in America they are working
American in the border of the city in
the top in this case people terrific
mentality not formally confer the origin
and he's black people and they have no
problem to behavior and you need to
understand what how they work how they
live in community it's very different to
work with the people to to manage
knowledge or work when I have working
daily living center living I think it's
a very important understand wake up the
people what is there
behavior the traditional four to work
for me is a very very important so it's
not important to replace the connection
I think this is important but is not the
target of architecture you can you can
work with the community what is
philosophy sociology is you don't do I
think a prob with one approach we aren't
very good at talking to to speak in a
particular black and white what happened
with in with the great literary
wonderful in this point I have
multiplicity we are interested to work
with multiplicity with the difference of
course sometimes the practice go out of
the place sometimes go out of the
ordinary oxide or sometimes you need for
me the most water when you teach is
wholly prepared to the people to develop
attitude of the design masculinity
first thing first is how built our
attitude to the desire to think of the
design to think of an architecture is
not what what what is not the acronym
for medical decision animal is not the
problems do not accumulate information
is of you transmission transmission the
attitude to what you want what is the
form that you like you live what
astonishes do to dreams
what and what you want what you want to
do I know I know I know what to speak
what is the forms what is what is it for
when you like it maybe they don't know
very well
I spoke before with the community of the
Santo Domingo and I showed the project
to the community the community don't
understand but what I do
maybe they say I don't understand that
they could be for ethics for before the
most important is the translation as
information gained what to understand
what I want to talk to to teach and then
teaching for me tell me this mrs. not
it's not impose
availability it's not import of the
agony is the transmission of the
community communication we do you speak
with people of that particular way speak
or what one where do you work what do
you do what you like to do indeed
believe in them in the time and after to
the world that is most important them
would you like the totally the blue
architectural green a petrol I think it
is not Department the description if you
should ask the happy ending of the story
and it was very interesting to see how
the space is I'm happy that you look
like those videos were the the building
is finished some people are really
appealing and using it and they have
liked to know the beginning of the story
now how some of their most very
difficult if neighborhoods when
something new architecture arrived and
there's people there that maybe don't
know what
this is kindergarten in Santa Marta when
we're not with the kindergarten in
general in Colombia the people have
security guard yeah
I'm disabilities opportunity will occur
and the people cannot go inside of you
because maybe have a problem with it the
stronger the product now this project is
don't have a security guard and the
people to live around to this
neighborhood is a former poor
neighborhood singly plotted the semi me
a trees and the people go in the doctor
who go in the miscibility the people
used especially in French activity is
open every time for ministers or
practice I didn't see before that and
this is a wonderful support in these
days our dog problems
destroy every time and it's very
difficult to work with the community of
very poor community our court Deborah
did this is people very very don't have
to explain but the community of the
series the different social differences
remedy is differential my daughter
Hannah potatoes all on overseas but in
this case this never beautiful and use
the school and create the schools every
time that's it
so in general my brain don't have a
problem of the destroyed one or two
projects with this product
well thank you Thank You Giancarlo yeah
I I just wanted to remark your
he said second I'm very grateful as an
advocate how you used architecture to
give hope to educate to share with the
cultural world but also with the
communities everything personally I you
were telling me that getting close to
Spain and you like Spain your first
products about libraries the rapper
explained is not good because you give
for toxins or forget for them for the
show of the key today I know that you
like spin very much so what you
shouldn't have you theory of game that
one of our explain very well what's
again explain that to this theory of
game the artists have always three
figures at the companion it's the angel
that illuminates you and always somehow
inspires also the Musha the news that
you follow it with almost blind faith
but the inspiration is Lorca projected
angel had a terrific of the of lineup of
the news last night he said that so the
real artists fellowship 2020 is what I
think
of your projects twende is a kind of
psycho emotional relationship to the
apartment it's really a hidden a
vocational of the the deeper the more
authentic part of our creative act this
case world has been I think some of your
projects don't have clear angel or Musa
but they do have part of this to it so I
I want to thank you for this amazing
