you
a Dutch issue most prolific work on
digital technologies and the self
conscious product for detailing sites to
questions that ages questions of agency
and mediation Natasha shul is a cultural
anthropologist train at UC Berkeley and
thirdly she is an associate professor of
media cultural communication in NY even
and she is a community face because
before note my she talked for eight
years in the program in science
technology and society here at MIT and
she was more than 10 years in early 15
and I talked about two books covers
almost published the first one which was
published in 2012 called addiction by
design mission gambling and Las Vegas
and working to integrate into
interrogated the law of design from the
present space to the slot machine
algorithms in constructing the gambling
addiction experience drawing on 15 years
of ethnographic work with compulsive
gamblers and smoke machine designers
chill shape like on a symmetrical oceans
and I think it's the church in common
among gamblers and the game reviews were
forthcoming book keeping track cells in
technology self-regulation and a beta
driven life from which we will be
today I requires into the amount of self
screaming and South governance and
gentle by drawing use of digital self
trackers too much earliest aspects of
human life and sociality from fitness
and health to connect attend diets and
emotional so he'll also very economic
research which has been supported by
name is Christian foundations show has
an active presence initially DNS
requests the documentary film cafe only
can do Las Vegas comes multiple students
on TS and women school festival
appearances so
this is my first visit back but never
been in this group work at the top over
on this side of campus so it feels it
feels you and I'd like to enter into the
material a little bit about the
characterizes my current research by
returning to my last book for about 10
or 15 minutes and narrate how I got from
that project to my current work on self
tracking technology because I think it
really illuminate two routes to the for
the students of agency even a naive
agency there its stake in this series
and it was useful for me to do that and
when I finished up preparing the last I
give a short shrift to this question of
the specific case of mood that I'm happy
to talk about that Q&A so my 2012 book
is an account this intimate relationship
that exists between design and
experience in the case of slot machine
gambling and more specifically how
technological innovations starting in
around the 1980s on and a lot of changes
of opposites that mediates addictive
behavior and I want to tell you a little
bit about what that experience is like
specifically the kind of loss of agent
that gamblers experience they describe
entering this dissociative trance-like
state that they call machines own that's
their term for Edward just the zombies
sometimes and in this zone they're so
focused on playing the game that things
like dating worries social demands even
sometimes bodily awareness and certainly
a sense of clock time monetary value etc
all of that fades away and this kind of
contradicts popular notions of gambling
I think as a suspenseful risky volatile
occasion of sitting there you're
expecting something or hoping and this
this idea that gamblers are driven by
this desire to get something for nothing
is really challenged when it comes to
gambling addicts because what they're
describing is in quest for nothingness
itself and they describe machine
gambling ironically as a very reliable
dependable mechanism for suspending
volatility for suspending risk and
contingency and most of all I came out
in the areas i conducted
suspending the imperative to self-manage
the imperative to be too short to choose
to be an agent and to being vigilant so
it's a kind of suspension of agency and
the question that gets asked a lot in
this conversation or the conversation
out there in public in politics around
sluggish an addiction seems to always be
this polemic conversation does addiction
lie on inside the device or inside the
gambler and the premise of my book put
forth in the introduction is that this
is the wrong way to frame on the
question because addiction is always a
relational condition and you can't have
addiction without having a relationship
between an interaction between subject
and a particular substance object drug
etc and since most attention in the
literature of public discussion gets
placed on the gambler side
genetics history did someone should they
have taken more probability of classes
in school this is this kind of
conversation my book goes the other way
and says yes but there's also all of
this other stuff going on that we're
just not aware of so I try to tell the
story in the book of all these other
agents and actors effects and the role
that they are playing in producing and
maintaining this this state of the
machines oh and I'm not going to go
through the whole book but just to give
it to give a sense of different
registers on which this happens one was
just things up is here we are
architecture design passageways should
keep twisting and turning through
gradual gentle curves and angles that
smooth out the shifts and directions the
ideas that you're already getting
someone who's them before they sit down
and you are taking decision making out
of the equation because making a harder
right perpendicular angle would be
requirement agent in a way that occur in
a carpet
not architectural decisions is women sir
clutching her purse apprehensive this
was drawn to illustrate bad design the
element players avoid most when gambling
is expanse there's his law of space
elimination and actual logs designed
dictates bringing down the ceiling
making things jumbled and cozy and
cramped that you can just get into a
protected sanctuary or plan that is
actually their language it was likely to
protected sanctuaries and then once
you're at the machine there's a
whirlwind recovering a lot of these
these features bill acceptor this allows
you to get money into the machine a lot
of it and play off of credit so that
you're not stopping and putting coins at
a time again which requires some kind of
it's just gesture all right oh you
forget about it and playoff credits more
recently and more commonly today we just
play our cards and you can even go into
the 0s or like credit cards put that in
there if you just say also electronic
push-ups so these allow you to just rest
your hand and touch with the fingers so
this is still the gesture that used to a
note machine yet slot machine gambling
but in fact this is really the gesture
today and doing this you can play a
staggering and some of these machines 12
1,200 hands our which again just just a
simple event frequency of that to use a
term from addiction sort of eliminates
the possibility of rational
decision-making by mistake not only time
of the physical energy and so do
economically design consoles here's your
one of the labs that I worked in when
they were trying to sketch out what what
they console the most optimal properly
configured console for longer faster and
more intensive play would look like and
curves again
in court and here is another image of
the very top design of chairs so there's
a whole if you go to these big trade
shows there's all wings that are
dedicated just to the chair of
technologies even as haptics in it and
audio-visual engineers apply a kind of
sensory ergonomics as well then softly
pixelate the video monitors and balance
acoustic elements of what companies
audio director told me that he programs
all the video slots to play all their
sounds it usually it's around 400 unique
sound events per game to play them all
the universally Pleasant key of C so
that's the kind of again no much shocks
or jolts it used to be you know clean
clanging bag and lights everywhere on
now the design logic is that you wanna
kind of tunnel people in so you're using
new ways elimination on technology
you're really thinking about decibel
levels and where things are reflecting
off of the most important innovations
when it comes to keeping players in the
zone are those which lie behind the
screen where they algorithms are
computing the outcomes you have like oh
the best design machine sitting in the
best chair the ceiling height perfect
etc but people aren't going to stick
that that would be me hope someone is
sitting down but they're only going to
stay with the right math math is what
will be people stay on in here again it
was I was surprised to encounter the
language of smooth curves one
mathematical mathematician they do they
do have math arms with sitting around
the table PhDs in math and trying out
all of these different permutations of
odds he said you know traditional slot
machine used to look like this first
line very spiky you were babysitting up
in your chair because you would either
double or triple or you lose everything
but now we can video technology we have
micro processing we are able to almost
sort of distributors across all these
different symbols you can bet on
multiple lines and you put in for me yep
30 back you don't know if you're winning
or losing and pretty much whether you're
winning or losing almost every hand
gives you the same audio visual feedback
and lulled into this kind of state and
that looks like the top line this is a
line where your money is slowly chipped
away at but you're not really aware of
it and he said we wanted it if you think
about math that's a couch we want you to
be able to reply on this reply on our
math model it's a very comfortable couch
so I all levels of design architectural
atmospheric organ Amin audio-visual
game algorithmic all of all this work is
being done you could say to use terms of
this gallery to reduce I'm co-opted
decision-making agency and maybe even
you could go further and say to provide
an escape from agency which is what the
gamblers the gambling addicts
particularly has their eat here are just
some words before we switch gears here
I'm going to give you a flavor of how
gamblers describe that loss of agency
they describe it as emerging between
their intentions and the machines
responses so one gambler told me
sometimes I feel this vibration between
what I want and what happens another
gambler I get to the point where I no
longer feel my hands touching the
machine I don't feel it there as well
connected to the machine when I play
like it's an extension as if physically
you couldn't separate me from the
machine oh and then then I've had to put
these to build because the next quote
departs from this narrative of
connection and extension which is still
going on here there's still a reference
point right and the most extreme
Dowler's speak in terms of bodily exit
to exit all together on here is a kind
of pulling as described you go into the
screen it pulls you in like a magnet
you're over there machine like you're
walking around inside of it going around
the cards and it's not just the body of
the player that ultimately does
if you're really in the zone but
actually also the body of the machine
that withdraws into the background so
even as its console and screen main
processes are very alive and working to
enable the zone steak if it does
withdraw the machine isn't even early
there it's important in the game because
you see it but as you play the Machine
becomes less and less important it
starts out the machine and then it's the
cards choosing which car is to you and
then it's the game just playing the game
it's interesting we're choosing comes in
because you think of this as a site of
agency but it's through the choosing
itself accelerated and configured and
focused you know with all kinds of noise
interference put out on that that is
what really Coulson really into is this
zone so it should be clear that I I
regard the zone as an effect of a
dynamic relationship a relationship
between a player who's seeking this the
zones are out of time space and
existence and then machine design that's
built for time on device and this is the
industry's term and I think it's a trace
their version of machines own they use
it so often that they refer to it as Tod
time on device is what people are are
after but I want to emphasize that
although this is a dynamic relationship
it's not equal each partner is coming
into the table or to the machine into
work with very different stakes so self
suspension on the one hand on to extract
maximum revs pack which is revenue per
available
on the others there's a certain tension
there I in my book I talk about it and
thanks for the introduction for scien
hosting this as a kind of asymmetric
collusion so by way of shifting to the
new directions I've taken post book I'll
today just a couple slides up the last
bit of the world of gambling machines
that I became interested in what had a
lot to do with my new interest
self-tracking this would be these now
quite lively conversations in the world
of technocratic policymaking around how
to handle slot machine addiction and
it's a certain spectrum is it all we
regulate yourself responsible gambling
or we actually slow down reels can we
actually intervene in the design of game
itself or this other interesting
approach so as increasing pressure is
put on states to regulate this is the
kind of approach they're going for this
approach is to equip machines or to
through overlay this this self banking
attending a quasi banking
self-regulation software that will it
doesn't interfere it all the way in the
aims of the machine
you can play longer fast or more to hook
and hold you it just says oh but here
you have this put in your players card
you can play with this you've got this
whole little module that encourages
these voluntary acts of self-governance
so you can do budget management exclude
yourself from a calendar personal risk
evaluation you can actually take a test
or if you're an addict right there this
is the first of these instruments and it
was called the responsible gaming device
and it sort of SAT above the plain
caramel and their AP track monitor and
manage basically time and money or the
two things that you were managing it
runs on the same cards the very same
part that marketing runs on which is
again kind of ironic it's it's also
feeding the customers data into her own
dashboards so she can manage her
behavior as it's feeding that data into
the marketers who maybe even sending
advertisements down to the main claims
place screams OH near is just a little
flavor of different screens you get
limits all sorts of things and it is an
unlike it isn't unlike banking software
called pre-commitment Samba we're
technically and finally as I mentioned
you can actually self-administer on
screen addiction evaluation
between different coping mechanisms so
therapy can actually have a great so
instead of seeking to fix the machine
it's deploying machine itself as a
vehicle for risk management and
responsibility as an instrument rather
than object of governance and here are
some of things that it's called
controlate personal navigator
responsibility device it's deflect
obviously it's deflecting attention away
from the product and onto the person and
that's the asymmetry here because one
hundred percent of the responsibility
for behavior management is is being
placed on the person really while she
continues simultaneously to be addressed
as an object of behavioral engineering
so it's another way of saying this is
that she she's sorted to control herself
as a consumer sovereign who's in command
andrew preferences and actions a sort of
Homo economicus but she's being treated
as Homo addictive and here's a quote
showing how in fact this isn't just my
see economic language I'm pulling but
here we have a site advertising game
plan is consistent with consumer
sovereignty since each gambler has the
choice about what limits are appropriate
for him and her and the idea that
reduces the likelihood of getting lost
in the game so now I would send away for
the world of gambling devices and turn
to this to this different set of
self-tracking self modulating dashboards
that I've become interested in and I
think those dashboards allow us to look
from a different vantage point but I
think with the same richness of view on
the set of themes the keeps recurring in
my work between this dependency and
freedom escaping empowerment d
subjective vacation and clunky word
clunky but useful were responsible
ization and my current project is
focusing on a set of technologies that
on the face of it would it would seem to
be quite different slot machines because
they're designed to promote to enhance
and to buttress agencies that serving
the aim of a stake they would seem to
serve razzle see the moment on the aim
of empowerment some of these are
wearable technology other self tracking
devices mobile apps that are awesome and
moving out of the casino into the wild
into everyday life tracking these
travelers are on the body as it
around and he's tracking not only the
body but it's blue moons its movements
it's choices it states so just a little
lay of the land under how how familiar
this audience is I want to ask for a
show of hands and you have these things
where you right now but it's
increasingly captured the imagination at
attention venture capitalists technica
startups and mass market consumers and
you'll see that the virtual and physical
aisles of places like best buyer just
chock full of these this is actually
from a year or so back and it's just 143
devices in the category of distance
traveled alone at the close of 2014
amazon opened its are launched this
specialty shop and wearables with about
800 products there's a lot more now and
they also put up this interesting kind
of pedagogical pitch here like what what
is wearables for how could you use this
how could you integrate it into you like
how why are they designed designed to
let you know how much activity you've
had track w and sleeping son you'll be
able to do this in that sort of
suggesting to this emerging market how
they can use it as we know these
smartphone John Samsung and Apple hat as
well as Google and Microsoft everyone
server has put out there
kind of health and fitness tracking
systems you also find it but this is a
really rich ethnographic site for me in
the aisles of the Consumer Electronics
Show I've been doing research there for
two years running on you'll find things
like heart rate detecting earbuds that
adjust the musical output to keep your
heart rate at certain levels of calm or
energy body fat measuring bathroom
scales electronics in patches for
monitoring blood flow toothbrushes that
make sure you brush long enough
incorrectly all matter of gadget like
this and most of all an impressive
collection of wristbands with sensors
that log footsteps heart rate sleep
phases and more I'm just going to talk
over a video that I'm going to run right
now without any sound just so that you
can get the sentences on it's a
advertisement first Fitbit which is
really the leader at the moment showing
how your daily decisions can add up to a
healthier you so it follows this woman
as I see in a moment playing in the
backyard with her children and then it's
been a Segway inside to her office
through these sort of imaginary lines to
her laptop at her desk suggesting that
consumers can trust this device to
capture all this rich meaningful data
that is being generated as she moves
through her day and synchronize it and
here we have this guy facing this
decision does he go down into the metro
and he decides to walk and then he
realizes his extra steps and here we see
these these Concentrix daya circles
radiating out from this runners feet
officer illustrating the technical
achievement of this consumer grade
signal processing and then it closes on
the figure of a sleeping woman contented
she's she's not anxious about everything
she's been wearing her tracker and the
band will help her to optimize even an
activity and I thought I'd just to give
you as her tour tour of this technology
goes through some of the different
things so we've seen steps exercise we
had you're not feeding activity on the
fitbit's competitor jawbone we may have
it on right now has an idol holder which
also addresses in activities so when you
sit still too long it will let you know
and this little gadget the ride
backwards sits in your pocket and it
just simply report to the time sat
through day and I one of this the
consumer electronics shows i went to the
debut of this technology the google lift
its posture technology and fastens on
your lapel or your bra strap and it
records your posture and then actually
corrects your posture through this
subtle or not so subtle vibration
through your app you can control when
your buzz how your bust and even how
intensely your it buzzes so you perform
standard activity tracking but the
primary purpose
regularly this stationary States sitting
or standing here's a quote all about
your posture all about your life one
move changes everything the ad ends of
this video adds a corporate meeting and
there's a woman kind of slumped over and
disempowered looking is that you don't
care anything seeing all we see is the
change puts your shoulders back and
smiles a little bit as small changes to
be empowering the others of the rooms so
all of these Monday niall littles
aspects are being of life form a trinket
it's stepping sitting and sipping
standing here is happy fourth this is
designed around the activity different
name and what it does is monitors and
records the length of each meal the
number of fork servings and time between
each serving so if it's shorter than 10
seconds the fork oscillates so you know
to slow down and I'll just read I you're
advised to take about 10 to 20 choose it
can trigger happy Forks alarm by eight
fast don't panic set the fourth down on
the side of the plate wait until the
light turns green again
signaling the name is safe to take
another fight so it turned something as
routine as the single bite into a
question of potential danger it's
marketed as a way to take control of
your health and it also recommends
keeping your cell phone in view although
we're hearing everything's so much in
mediaeval baskets the table to get your
phone's way during mealtime it should be
socially convivial but here's this woman
just communion with her her own data
that she treats herself this day is
being fed back to her closes this loop
here's the data one can examine over
time and then just if you want to see
what these alerts like one of the
screams next for serving six seconds too
fast and Stephen Colbert many
journalists have mocked this but it is
real on the heat he called it an
American because his effort was too slow
consumption an in hydration is another
one day but quite will act on is the
focus of a range of devices like the
water pal and that's a small wireless
scale goes on
of your bottle and it keeps track using
built-in flash memory sensors
accelerometer as it keeps track of how
much liquid is being consumed from it
and then I conveys that to your phone
and it will alert you if you're comin hi
Drayton enough similarly we've got a
passive hydration trapping bottle here
that uses these built-in sensors to
measure how much syndrome and it will
adjust the daily goals based on
temperature that day or the humidity
levels it provides feedback through
flashing lights so there's different
approaches here another one changes
color from red to yellow to green to
signal how close you are to Newark
hydration goals so as with the happy
fork and some of the other things we've
looked at all these devices transfer the
burden of vigilance and even to a degree
behavior change from selves to sensors
and computational algorithms and I'll
return to that point in a moment just
another set I said is getting short
shrift to move so the next couple that
I'll talk about I think one could
classify you're not self reporting
staking my mood is X Y or Z and these
mood categories but it's about breathing
being calmer also it's a sort of
effective on
elation and here you know what is the
apt here it's the act of breathing maybe
even the most intimate of these Monday
max we've been looking at endo style so
your spider it's this small little
wearable device and the idea that if you
learn better to regulate your breath you
will then learn better to regulate your
stress so what it does is it alerts you
very subtly buzzing on again you wear it
wherever you choose and your body it's
little stone when your respiration that
comes shallow or erratic it will let you
know so you can take a deep breath this
is kind of supposed to be a seamless
thing and it companies you is always on
here's just one kind of thing you can
look at the website suggests do do these
periodic reviews do experiments on
yourself you know what does your
breathing look like when you're working
under computer versus reading a book
meditating and how can you cultivate
better breeding habits here's another
device that's concerned with in training
new patterns of breath and focus that's
the muse this is a seven sets or mobile
EEG headset on it's designed to give you
you a window into overtime the idea is
that you'll get a handle on these
intimate signals of your own brain data
through this real-time audio feedback
and then
dynamic on screening visualizations so I
use this a few times what was given to
me and you hear your brain like your
many many iterations I can talk about
organ Q&A I know what design choices
were maybe what fell away what was
beefed up but as it is as it stands now
you hear your brain as weather and it's
stormy when you're distracted and when
you're really still and quiet in that
piece a little bird consin sits next to
you and starts to tweet but if you start
to kind of game for the bird which is
very unsafe right to want something to
be attached to it on then the bird will
fly away so they kind of built they
realize that people were we're gaming to
get the birds and so you're going to
learn you want the bird to come to eat
next to you can try to be still and then
you know wind is a hue to bring your
attention back to your breath and this
is actually quite different than you can
talk like this I can't go into
differences but I see this particular
technology as quite different than some
of the other ones that we just looked at
because it's not always on it's really
seen as a certain meditation training
device that you put on for three minutes
you can put it on throughout the day or
just once in the morning you could get
this neurofeedback and then you take
that back those lessons with you
throughout the day so see if your brain
activity learn how to calm your
busy mind so however it works it is
still about what it shares in common
with these others is that it purports to
be about mastery control self-regulation
kind of enhanced agency so what we make
of all this so you know I'm so
formulating what I think of all this but
it seems to me that the cells of
self-tracking are understood by those
invested in wearable technology and also
of themselves by interviews with
trappers and the question of how actual
tracking unfolds I want to step aside
and say it's quite different than what
I'm presenting here which is more the
promise and the advertisement marketing
but the idea is that the selves are
choosing agents that they their their
consumers well-being depends and derives
from the choices they make this is you
know distinctly value and fraught domain
of life in our society individuals are
shaped are urged to shape their life
your choice there's to be ever vigilant
savvy entrepreneurs of themselves and
yet there are so many different things
to eat and exercise types to do etc plus
so few resources sometimes that these
subjects all other assorted to be self
vigilant are in self managing often lack
the knowledge in the foresight and the
resources to do that to navigate this
abundance of potential choices so I
think the wearable tech industry as I
read is is banking on that double
insecurity the customers that they
imagine are really unsure and fearful a
little bit and
don't know they're a bit line they don't
know whether to trust their own senses
and desires and intuitions as they're
doing things like breathing or eating or
you know chewing sitting again it's
really these really mundane aspects of
dating life and the idea is that people
are flying blind through their daily
routines and that they need help and
wearables promised to fill in the blind
spots and take the guesswork out of
everyday living that's the pitch they
make that they're going to supplement
the myopic Vantage of real-time
experience with this continuous
informatik mode of perceptions of
assistance clearly is computation
mediation and has has implications for
the kinds of agency that become possible
so this is I was thinking about this
kind of view because they say just
really see your sterols using these
metaphors of the visual but unlike the
clinical
I think it's just a useful comparison
that that Co describes that the clinical
gaze is focusing on the sights and the
sounds of the spells of acutely dual
bodies and what's going on here is that
sensor technology and big data analytics
are attending to the digital exhaust of
well bodies these are little
informational bits whose cumulative
diagnostic value could never be
registered by the eyes of a doctor in
real time so this is a mode of
apprehending and assessing subjects that
that's happening remotely from the space
and time of the body it's happening in
the cloud not the examination and it's
an epistemology that concerns itself
with this kind of Time series data
rather than immediate experience with
correlation rather than causation with
patterns rather than events so while
these patterns are rendered on into when
these patterns get rendered into these
visually digestible formats like scores
were visualizations or even like six
seconds to go oops you know too fast
when those little translations are made
this can it have self-awareness so this
is what one of the speakers of the
Consumer Electronics Show this is how we
talked it up you can build a profile or
a picture of what it is you're doing
this lets you see and understand
choices remaining on the daily basis
which is really who you are the choices
you make all day long whether to take
the stairs the elevator what you looking
or not I he thought it was important to
remain constant touch with this data
profile it's been talked about as a day
to Dumbledore XO self so so that you can
grasp how your choices are impacting you
now how the gauges are moving as you
make choices so he suggested that in
this way personal sensor technology and
function as a kind of six sets and what
he really means by that is that that you
will be able to discern is otherwise
imperceptible effects of having your own
happens right the better that's coming
from these electromechanical sensors and
data processing software Melanie Swann I
hate this image it's not mine it's one
of her publications but she chooses a
similar metaphor to describe that this
kind of supplement to self understanding
and she says this gives us a fourth
person perspective so we've got six
cents or the person perspective and
ultimately she said this is a new kind
of truth and
you can say forever this is a new ground
of a new kind of agency maybe or we can
say no this is just a compromise the
agency or we can't even use that word
anymore I mean that'sthat's up for
discussion but she said you know this
new hancher isn't quote not possible
with ordinary senses because it doesn't
correlate he doesn't correspond to a
phenomenological self spatially
temporarily located but I kind of
database self self whose truth lies and
scattered points and associations of the
these dynamic accretions they can only
be seen by by the machines of the speak
so we're we're invited to see ourselves
as as longitudinal databases that are
constantly improving content on you are
your data is often the refrain so what's
sort of the pushback against this is so
scholars who've been looking at this
they say you know that this rhetoric of
self as database opens this problematic
gap between the you of data set and then
the epistemologies by which that data
set it's a mast and studied in a
meaningful there's scholars Lucy suchman
and on a desire they say the wearable
computing is coming on
presenting itself is the only way to
bridge this epistle logical lacuna that
divides the modern body from the knowing
and acting self from the agent right
that it's presenting itself is the only
way to really know yourself and bring
physiological fact I into the grasp of
the experiencing subject that was a
quote from their analysis you could say
that maybe they're presuming to readily
a certain definition of what agency is
on in order to make that criticism but
here I thought I'd read for you
something that speaks just in this
attitude they're talking about which is
an advertisement from Samsung what if
you can ask your body questions and
listen to the answers every minute of
every day you can adjust your habits
according to your body's advice imagine
the insights gained the mysteries
unlocked we change your life so here the
body is in the sensing organ through
which you're aiming self-knowledge but
it's this data generate generating
device that you've got to hook up to
sensor technology and emily algorithms
in order to be in order to knowing so
here's such as a again this is a body
that's continually emitting signs albeit
importance inaccessible to the self that
might act to maintain it so this
question of whether technology is kind
of technology is empowering or
disempowering you know buttressing
agency or eroding it is appointed to
make when tracking enthusiasts some of
the
the designers of wearables and this
emerging from designer is that I've
really seen this only in the last year
of researching as I've been looking at
for about two not three years now on
this emerging sentence is that we can we
can and should do more than actually
just track people and give them self
knowledge and perspective on their
choices we should guide their choices on
quote in the fashion of a thermostat so
there's sort of one step further being
taken here all of the ideas that is
technology shouldn't only track where's
but keep them on track this is behind my
title keeping track which I think speaks
to a broader phenomenon and just self
tracking technologies per se so the idea
is that these technologies would
interrupt the flow of experience and
prompt to you as via to eat or pee or
meditate etc and it pitches away to them
as soon as it's how does this fit in
with what I began with which is these
are different than slot machines these
are empowering people it's about mastery
its control well yes but how is that a
story being presented on an who's
mastery is it it's kind of offered as a
way to embrace the project of self
enterprise and consumer sovereignty you
could say without undertaking all the
tedious nebulous anxiety-provoking work
of lifestyle management that anyway you
can never do on your own without the
technology so this is
these devices are presented as did you
digital compasses for modern living is
how I think about it and they help you
with this they help you sort of tune in
to how small daily decisions add up to
big results she's really happy that this
thing is tracking her taking care of her
so it's self care but it's also being
being cared for there's a quote from
another designer and longtime self
tracker and she says they were in the
brink of really exciting things devices
that will give you actionable updates
before we need to ask she said I don't
want to track I want it to be done for
me insert a chip in my mouth have it
recorded my calories so the consumers
that device managers are now imagine a
potential market out there is this
market the consumers who are not
actually aspiring to autonomy but
wishing to outsource autonomy wishing to
outsource the labor of self-regulation
to this personal sensor technology and
here you see the mother wait you almost
too nicely captures this externalization
of responsibility it's billed as
whatever you need whenever you want to
depend all-knowing mother will intercede
quite your first before you know your
university is the way it works is
underneath as top ropes many things so
those are referred to as
okies the mother is the main station she
just kind of sits there and then kinis
little five devices to your pill box or
your faucet so it's kind of a narrative
things but it's also tracking you on
your kings and all of these places where
it might slip through the cracks during
the day taking medication etc your
mother will help so just leading up to
some kind of provisional punch line I
think there's a lot of talk in the past
decade or so a dis reiteration
reiteration of this story of the
contemporary world I was characterized
by this regime of anticipation where it
is do the whole present where we are
expected to regulate ourselves the
welfare state is retreating where we are
asked to have this constant state of
stamps and alertness as a kind of
normative effective state but I think
the words of this this tracker and
designer you know but please just put
the chip in my mouth and recorded the
calories and then technologies like like
mother here suggests that the consumers
and wearable technology are quite
desperately looking for a way to relieve
themselves the work of anticipation that
that's part of the story or at least to
share the burden so it's not evident
that these are tools of responsible is a
shin equipping people to take care of
their own welfare they
actually positioned users as desiring
not to be charged on it son is a
solution to that desire ah so this these
are not that the kind of active choosing
selves these are passive choose
themselves and you can imagine a future
iteration of that Fitbit advertisement
that I showed in which the protagonist
gives herself over to this carefree
backyard play that she won't show only
trust devices to track and collect and
store all of her information and data
but to keep her on track to interrupt
her and prompt her when an algorithmic
analysis of her own real-time data deems
it necessary to eat or drink or sip or
rest or stand so I'm going to end up
this image and leave things a little bit
open because by over thinking around
this is still forming but I just want to
say this this injunction to self-manage
or tracking and it's done gene with
technology it's not just leaving with
the idea that it's not a purely autop
isin formula but that it falls somewhere
between enterprise and submission
responsibility or agency and discipline
and we could even say that it's
constituted by those tensions so I can
go all in there thank you
thank you very much so I wonder if there
are any questions top of his course I
thank you thanks very good talk um can
you talk about the role of time interval
so all these tracking metrics that you
talked about a very short there to a
lifetime right so we're juicing in steps
in a day or whether you got up in a very
short period of time or house and once
you mad maybe because they're more
verifiable work sumer izybelle but why
are there not sort of longer you know
humans of blowouts cycles whether its
own fertility cycle for a woman where
I've seen some wearable devices so
playing market but it's from the paper
economic market but in that same
communication of the same engagement
hasn't been successful if you think
there's
about the shorter time period the
shorter time interval that relates to
like gambling in satisfaction eats that
sort of makes longer-term goals harder
to manage well at least partly it's
because I material I chose to produce on
here sort of really elemental it's a
building blocks of agency drinking and
creaming just organism in the world but
I could have focused on a whole lot of
others which are more about monthly I
makers see Maggie's in the audience and
certainly speak about the fertility
tracking acts out there and tracking
sleep patterns over a month and does it
relate in doing certain different
experiments if you go to quantified self
meetings they kind of poo-poo this idea
that you're going to immediately get
your Fitbit in that very day you'll be
learning things and seeing things about
yourself because if you really want to
learn something you'll be seeing how
many steps you took but there's no
correlation there there's no sirve
self-understanding really and their idea
is that you put these devices on and set
up the sensors but then you let them run
for a while just they're very similar to
online poker players never check at the
end of the session how much did you win
or lose traders doesn't matter we're
talking about the law of large numbers
here and you've got to let it build up
because only when it in credence to a
certain point is it
value so one guy talked two things for
himself as a time-series self or
actually as I elaborate this material in
the book it's going to be more focused
when it comes to actual tracking
practices on that longer Dre this is
sort of a product he does just put it on
but I will say one one more thing just
because I didn't put this last line I
did kind of want to get to it so this is
called the think does anyone know what
to think is so this is a pretty radical
departure I think from a lot of this
other stuff because it's there in the
aisles of consumer electronics show
alongside self tracking technology it's
a dialogue with self tracking technology
but it's sort of not tracking anything
it's doing something to you it is
keeping you on track it's sort of the
outer limit of book of this kind of
mother model where self-reflection drops
away all together so there's no real
insights to be at all and they
explicitly the CEO explicitly says you
know the problem music Fitbit is that
it's giving you all this data and
telling you
change yourself why do we need to do
that if I can put this on this is
combines but there's also energized it's
called by and choose energizer calm it's
it's FDA approved and it's been shown in
all these these studies that it is like
drinking two cups of coffee or taking a
quarter of the valium or something the
idea is where are you doing this with
coffee other things go ahead put it on
your head and keep yourself on track
what you need to look so it's for me out
of the week already know and there is no
data to reflect on there is no time time
interval is in question of course but
when this gets an item is upon myself
people it could be sort of hooked up
with a whole set of new experiments when
I use the thing do I sleep better at
night so that we track my sleep to see a
record that I've use the thing so it
certain can be networked in but it is
not tracking anything
they knew for a fascinating nature I
motherhood unperfect again upon the
connection between your first area of
study and your present one in the sense
that I wonder what what are the
similarities and differences between the
games acknowledges and track tracking
technologies because it seems that the
game technologists are into the same
kind of business as tracking
technologies are fighting out and how
people behave while they are habits but
then there's kind of evil we're all
behind wanting to do people even further
down and bad habits whereas the tracking
technologies maybe the results are the
same but they are then for sentence for
the person herself so she can be trances
about her back habits and then maybe get
rid of them but then a lone hand is when
these technologies are becoming more
presents don't we then maybe interrupt
in a new addiction I mean they do do we
come do we become addicted to them in
the same sense as game players become
addicted to their habits and these
technologies beeping them into their and
so on and so forth yeah i'm trying to
find just of the perfect answer to this
let me just pull it up here okay
so
part of the reason I didn't marry that I
got into this project was it and become
just disheartening for me to spend so
much time thinking about this sort of
his evil control and I was still
interested in tracking and the
technology and design these questions of
agency but I just couldn't do it anymore
looking at me new now they've found
their tracking gamblers in real time you
know giving them different odds to find
their pain it was just too much so as
quantified self and they began I felt
like I would be giving this project with
a fresh slate but then as I started
tracking tracking out of quantified DIY
sort of seconds into bestbuy consumer
electronics show the story started to
shift and change a little bit on and it
came into starkest relief when I found
myself in the Las Vegas Convention expo
which is where the consumer electronics
show is held every year it's the same
Expo Center where I had been going for
literally 15 years to track so I knew
all the corners and where the plugs work
it was like familiar landscape but there
was just a different overlay of
technology there and if that didn't feel
odd enough then I found myself on this
panel with this guy and what outfit you
haven't seen yet in the name of the
panel so it was called trap aholic that
disorder or having what get my friends
obsessive-compulsive comment we learned
the diligent tracking produces positive
results there's extreme barriers to Roy
how do we duplicate the behaviour of the
chocoholic etc in the future track mahal
ISM will will become the norm as they
were talking about this they were
gesturing physically toward the Las
Vegas Strip and they were saying these
slot machine makers have really figured
out this question of attention retention
we need to do it they're doing it make
them stand up there and say that because
they didn't have the same sort of public
image problem that means seniors we've
never stand up there and say like track
Hollis let's be more addictive but there
was this kind of happiness and they were
saying you know we check our cell phones
150 times a day let's check our fit that
like that much how can we make it that
grabby and the idea was that if you
poured it over from the Las Vegas Strip
or from can be crushed or any or from
facebook these same techniques and just
slapped it on top of digital health they
can solve a problem and I guess and
people have since come to me from those
industries and common line education can
we use the same kind of reward
structures and gamma phi this for good
it's like have you ever Natasha shoal
thought about playing this knowledge you
gain they're really good at doing these
things that we need to do you know an
online education or digital health have
you ever thought about using this for
good and my immediate reaction is just
to feel kind of creeped out but I don't
think that that that's not adequate
because it is a question you know maybe
it's a question that there are best
practices out there of ways to set up a
game or enter a design interface in a
way that is better than others when
you're talking about better just as the
script function of flourishing and
well-being I don't know that I want you
involved in that conversation as a as a
maker this minor but as I excited just
speaking back to your question I'm not
exactly answering but I guess I thought
a lot these loops to my primer project
just keep coming back and coming back
yeah
thank you very much I think my question
because maybe a little bit in the same
direction so I was very fascinated
developed a common language so they use
the same expressions and I wonder what
to expect or when
well the thinnest slot machines and the
reason that I was drawn to it and that
one of the reasons I was drawn to it as
an object of analysis is that these
machines are not that diverse they all
have seats and cabinet and scream maybe
the buttons are a little different on
one than the other but it's really a
neat of the odds there certain point
there's like a limited there's limited
flexibility and manipulation of the odds
they're working within this really
constrained design space they're also
channeling people in the kind of
homogenizing direction so i always
remember back when one day a whole lot
of my transcripts fell on the floor and
i did they got out of order and to kind
of shuffle the back it took me quite a
long time to parse the pages so that the
the CEO lived in sutherland which is a
very posh gated community in Las Vegas
that his pages in his description of
machines them were not mixed in with
literally the welfare mom five who was
gambling her milk money because the
words they use to describe this zone
were so similar so it was a certain anti
sociological moment maybe you know or
maybe it was a sociological insight of
swords airing of this technology can
take such a difference in life
experience
and channel it into such similarity you
don't see yet that kind of homogenizing
it's all over the place the happy fork
is very like it's about eating chewing
its vibrating and then the others name
is sitting in your pocket and buzzing
and then you've got a waterfall that's
blowing so it's preserved all over the
place it's less constrained and much
amazing so I don't see that yeah there's
nothing like machines oh but people do
talk the vocabularies they're about when
they they're tracking becomes kind of
learn what has a sort of run away and
that they're very often I'll hear from
people that order to reach the ten
thousand marks that they were going up
in downers there is the winter and I 80
or they lose sight of why they're
tracking in a similar way the gamblers
aren't aim to win they're just aiming to
me to you so it becomes kind of
autotelic
I'm just wondering if you had done your
research about path lock you can think
that that's an interesting example of
easing extreme measures not to break bad
habits yeah so padlock doesn't even do a
catwalk is I always have one going to go
start a class on self-tracking and I
kind of pass it around so the students
can use it object of delight strangely
and everyone just gets really giggly
around it but the a it goes on your
wrist and you self shock and it's quite
startling and the what is his name make
sure he he has gone back to all of these
early studies on self shocking that
became his story is too closely
associated with the kinds of things we
see in films movies are out now about
the Stanford Prison Experiment the
experimenter and some of these studies
that were using self shock for things
like homosexuality and that his argument
is that this got a bad team but it's
actually incredibly useful and
compelling and I don't think that
there's
any many studies that would count in the
scientific literature yet but there's a
huge amount an anecdote on this website
from people that you know to try to stop
cursing or eating something if they just
simply shocked themselves that maybe
will reduce so it's a self behaviorism I
mean behaviorism is one of the kind of
ingredients on this table of
self-flagellation that back most
perfectly captures them that you're
setting up your phone bill skinner box
on your wrist other thinkers were very
interested in like we've talked it seems
to me that whenever we're asking these
machines or shopping devices to guide us
there's a big question about are we
going to use their guidance are we going
to tell them going to be blonde to make
it helped us achieve it I mean it's one
thing for it to say because you might
have it more or you might very less but
maybe that day you just want to drink
you're starving and if you drink a lot
of water you're going to feel full
longer of my pen and you want to lose
weight or maybe convene
what's available you're the hard country
detector so I think there's a big
important distinction to recognize
between you're specifying what you're
looking for and they help Benny receive
it versus thick crying and I would say
that any type of prediction track
Collison speaks of giving up control to
the machine it puts us as the rack in
the main that he being guided I need
these checkout lines where go over there
to stand in a line and go back and forth
three four times I fine okay do you
recognize it but my problem and I can
just imagine that this fellow or someone
like it moves personally addiction to
being tracked also realized that we
sometimes that if advertisers can get
the slightest toehold in this guidance
phenomena well they have a lot of money
to make and I don't know what's a good
point so we have to be very careful i
think about this realize you're
following a new insights the literature
that is on this so far social sciences
has focused mostly on this privacy
aspect and what is going to be done with
this data and I think that's incredibly
important thing and they're treating
people working on it so I'm trying to
kind of carve out this space of thinking
about how does it make you selves and
change your attitudes to ourselves and
how does it relate to broader on regular
shifts if you could have a discussion
about how this is like a person level
version of nudge this is a apparently
Cass Sunstein does have a term for that
smudge but this is the song that it's
right of it this is reflecting this this
kind of governance that is based on the
idea that we are not rational that we
don't always know what we want and that
we should set up our environment using
the set the defaults that will produce
the better outcomes therefore opt out of
health insurance
into it and all these other things and
it's a kind of encouragement that we do
that for ourselves but I agree with you
that that kind of reflection about
setting up one's own parameters is
happening more in settings like
quantified self where people have the
resources and knowledge to do that and
to design their own algorithms you see
it falling away to bestbuy where its
mass market and the algorithms are set
and you know how many steps you take is
normed to these big population-wide kind
of statistics and the self does fall out
a little bit more it does start to look
a little bit like what would you fear so
that's partly why I want to track from
track tracking site quantified self out
and see what falls out and is quantified
self it is something like an ethics of
good life which is how it's very
elephant they articulated by
practitioners does does that did the
ethics Holloway comes out best buy if
these are my sins were guiding messing
and maybe hypothetically guiding us
possible direction does I mean all of us
is going exactly the same direction rush
your distinction between people and
there's a higher question what is life
and what is living if everything is
being decided for you and is a light
left right up dammit septra sound though
so I think there's a mission to write I
mean the whole figure of the mother what
would win it come say about this right
good enough mother is the one that let's
wait awhile when you're thirsty and
graduate stands time so that there's a
gap between your knees and the fillings
that you learn to fill that gap yourself
and so what happens when we're going to
really back the whole proposition of
development I think that's a great
question
one last question
in thinking I wish nothing but this is
such important basic questions about
that examples we can influence the good
some of the good things about well I was
shocked to pun intended we heard about
the song shocker yes but it was in part
in rhetoric neuroscience quarters and
with these studies are going on he was
edited 1 and some of the good news is
something like problems with the brain
because of injury or because I wasn't
also pronounced until I got sick let's
just you don't have HD accede to pull
out the chemicals are really rare in and
that was a dolt however the kids we can
we goin chemicals in our game
environment you're guessing all that
stuff it's finally catching up with us
over years as adults but the kids are
impeding the ship's when kaku seed oil
with all that pesticide it's not just a
matter of preservatives it's poison it's
country cotton significant amount of
product so there are pieces of
information every she said lauch
shipping my mouth with you know cat the
calories I'm more concerned it is very
tracking some chemical teaching their
children that are benefits which genre
although blues news things they have
your brain damage often from sports to
early before 12 just went to six hours
we must always going to be
I'm going to be stunning more of the
athletic superstars in 750 the bumpers
size and how do you make a case for not
being a session football earlier so
Benny is very empty continuing so a
shocker being in a smaller pieces have
been insufficient I'll just respond to
what one point you made their about the
cumulative nature of these things where
ingesting is having an invisible poisons
sort of by alone with these different
things I think that follows along a lot
of what we saw it's being regulated
today because this is part of a shift
from the burden of health care and
sickness in our world coming from acute
bacterial infections to lifestyle
diseases and the chronic and just as you
know each step we take or each burger
you know we each to like by the burger
can be sort of been applied in this
cumulative story poisoning of some kind
or diabetes or all of these heart
disease they all relate to these
everyday choices and I think that these
could be expanded out to not be just
measuring the behavior but the consumer
is taking chewing the binding but also
these cannula
what I will be jesting think we hate we
asked many questions but I think there
was one more question am i right they
could that would be you nice i'm curious
about this digital health industry thing
so if if they want to have more
consumers one thing they can do is get a
long game and hope that people will go
to bestbuy and advertise but another way
if this industry could could delete them
and throw might be to go through doctors
and have them recommend this to their
patients to sort of create this market
and i was wondering if in your in your
forays and your fieldwork you found this
happening that doctors were prescribing
this 22 patients and sort of the group
what what's nicely called
in space yeah so then the digital health
industry is sort of health and daily
health and fitness tracking contended do
for yourself then there's the insurance
companies are investing for their own
reasons and you heard a lot about that
in the news and then there are doctors
and hospitals and they're a huge
presence of it at the Consumer
Electronics Show there's a whole two day
non-stop stream did the digital health
summit and many of the summit ears our
doctors who are in the matter of like
Eric Topol promoting this vision of
data-driven on medicine and
self-tracking driven as well and some of
them have even hired sort of on-site not
just IT people but tracking IT people
that you would go and you would get on
exit from group visit you would get a
special cocktail tailored to you of what
what sort of the range of tracking
devices with helping having a console
and then you'd be sent home with the
prescriptions that's the Holy Grail dr.
Zia that all of these devices will fall
under prescriptions
thank you for the great questions
