and thank you all again for being here
Dean and I very happy for happy award
and we regret that our mana Zeus is not
with us and cannot be physically with us
due to the absurdity of the Muslim ban
regulations I am on screen over there
you see this is seen in the next day we
will be probing the different ways in
which violence has affected cities
afflicted by Wars and people's
especially a little in exploring the
historical and conceptual dimensions
that underpin the broader relationship
between warfare and organization the
destruction of cities has historically
been an act of punishment retribution
projection of absolute power or a
fulfillment of both brain for divine
intervention modern time so the
magnification of violence against cities
through enormous advances in
technologies and strategies of
destruction and destruction in the
unintended consequence metrics
action of cities has been first and
foremost an architectural and urban act
of known as importance than the
construction of cities which gave us the
critical determinant of other side
coined after the destructive state of
the grand New York the vision of the
1960s these developers have had
tremendous effect not only on the
conceptualization of architecture
urbanism cities identity on the mapping
and definition of territories and States
and on the complex relationship between
design planning reconstruction and
effects any discussion of these issues
is perforce predicated on historical
political and ideological trajectories
that led to the destructions of cities
as a consequence of war in the first
place and on the politics of identity
that prepared the soil for it and
fuelled it and then the benefit of the
insuring rigor structure the facile
notions of recovery and rebuilding that
depend on the secure and cohesive
national history in geography and an
actual identity which has already
resolved the question of this particular
history as both history and geography
have been contested the claim
speaking and even hostile identities
during and after many modern Wars
consequently the process of
reconstruction and the areas to be
reconstructed have been divided 3
appropriated and pre-configured and the
unfortunate zones that fell out of the
triumphs and new identities boundaries
have been ignored for downright
destroyed in the hope of creating new
realities on the ground alas today is an
entire regime of nation-states based on
European plan that dates back to the
first world war is the solving and we
are still unable to predict what will
replace it other than the chaos reigning
today our suppose you featured both
practicing architects and Urbanists
whose work has been reflective of
destruction and reconstruction as well
as architectural and urban historians
conservationists geographers
sociologists and journalists who have
theorized conjunction between war
planning destruction rehabilitation and
reconstruction in various parts of the
world but in Syria in particular by
bringing together speakers from a broad
range of disciplines who share the
common concern with the ethical
implications of the construction and the
broader relationship between
our symposium seeks to address the
following questions
how do violence and conflict not only
destroy but constitute design and
organize the build environment how do we
understand the organization of warfare
in relation to other theory of enemy
construction practices how do we
consider the recent warfare in the
Middle East with a special focus on
Aleppo in relation to the built
environment and the extent to which
reconstruction processes are being
weaponized as tools to the space process
and finally what is an ethical
reconstruction process and how do we
consider one for Aleppo and other middle
eastern cities that have recently with
this vast scale of destruction at the
end I would like to say the aqueous
students who are calculus today names
and I would like also to say Jose Huizar
well our able administrative assistant
who took care of all the logistics but
most of all who design the wonderful
poster
the idea for planning and organizing
this is impossible
I will now invite Addison Panero at the
a postdoctoral fellow for 2018 2019 and
an archaeologist who is currently
working on the destruction of cultural
heritage in northern Iraq to introduce
the speakers
