welcome to our second lecture in late
sermons in architecture series I have a
seat Simon
who is actually with us this whole
semester I mean that is a founding
partner at the HHS out of bottle and
associate professor at the ends up in
strasbourg france we're really excited
to have a semester he's working on a
project in Philadelphia up to the studio
on flexibility and I first came across
his work as an image from the jinhua
cultural park in China very sweet
leading the red dragon or baby dragon or
something like this and that a few years
later saw thee Leah extraordinary a very
simple pavilion he did it for the
pilgrimage site in Mexico and since then
he's been a range of projects from our
farm in upstate New York to a fashion
house
and I think the way he takes on both
program for a materiality is really
interesting so welcome for sure so don't
be afraid and they're not too many
people that we can sit bones together so
that's the entrance door I like to take
you for an hour what we do who we are
astonished most likely managed to the
show
Ross important the pictures that show
their color spaces himself on Kenisha
can be change just for it
for different reasons
he's our apartment sign marking you
don't know our team
this is
so that's how would we enactus are
custom-made suit which being good which
we could refurbish and enough faith to
our needs we go through it and that's to
understand before we come from
unfortunately the shape because
very shaky video
the business repay
free
there's not a base sunday refresh no
Oh
and you will see I mean we are very
heavily on and then you go back that is
always endeavoring and that we could
just just paint the distance we use but
was there and had a building and we just
put in coming from say you see you still
see you know that the palace and just
painted to thank me here you needed to
place which was in a regular continue it
was extremely important for us and it's
really into place where and you know it
depend very low sort of happening but I
mean it's very often very messy spray
Justin
strange
very important
I cooperate
for who
so this is then
Oh
reaction
his means that we don't believe in the
17th moment of launching his Renaissance
mind but we all think that a circle time
collaborative approach this result of
architecture so gravitation was an
extremely important part I think I
showed one one slide already beginning
from philosophy if mechanism is just
beautiful diagram were people all ninja
tune the rotting spatial look this a
week
these are a couple of plans
so the August Berkut forms of the way
trying to describe other corrosion in
this
chef instructors and 300
this was August later very serve all
people trying to be more interesting
better the Sioux of our protection or
languages which we are just about to
start construction average day for that
provision was in the park that we change
skin resurfacing on but now you get back
to the history in our version of this
idea on how we could start with we were
able to collaborate on a large and as
encouraging together with two older
architects 1 10 in game informer which
was a commercial
our scale and inside with us some half
times the appearance which was ok of
nimblest things for us because most of
the things which piece on her
at this age were not happened but the
only thing that was on the ground around
so that's the where we could suddenly be
served realized the power of destruction
the power of the rothman even a
structured where and his largest
structure on the road it was invisible
and he didn't see so we could just do
whatever and so will be proposed had a
large on the ground road which some
small skylight which are inches is
covering Phil double switch brands and
land so that they miss calendar that if
you order the force the people to use
that on the ground garage every day that
there's the visual connections in
daylight and which resulted in this very
strong sort of almost like a fish whale
stomach and so these are the these these
small-scale lines and the check ratings
are Hills between this garden see images
on power and we've always direct
connections thank you to them so that
this look like a lesson
structures are either they do build
structures actly as it and it was meant
to be always build a different car check
and another thing which was extreme
importance that we very early asian
mention that crunches before was the
experience of working for an additional
information on this is there we were on
special no no clue that we were young
and we were lucky enough to say we
recommended by the moon and there's a
thesis and website along that river and
there were also function and so all
these young people yes function who can
together to to build a strange project
for a public park with different Foley
we met a very important for our period
of our interpretations I the way making
their and this is coming from
I was interested in this beautiful
gardens this is a public toilet there in
the city and his artificial stone
official nation is another looking for
me to try to create an heiress holy in
our playground for children so we try to
focus on a very cheap material and
somehow to take advantage of the fact
that labor it's not what you take an
issue that unfortunately to say Labour's
worth keep is exactly the other way
around so refined it made something
extremely complicated the bruising so
the first time you realized that the
communication comparative is a very
important part of the design to protect
itself so we came up with a number of
openings which could be combined in an
insulator in discontent and we have that
idea of how these people would actually
build a modern science of it so it was
what was like at work how to do I want
to learn more and serving came up and we
did this
which an athlete of reflected in the
sense that they just came they had to
follow our version of construction and
kmart which is quite complicated are
crying Mary Cutcher which of course
almost done I mean it looks at the end
is very simple don't the thickness of
this and Howard concrete at some point
to me and then basic eight years that
there is open which are overlapping said
that the children which here on one
still planes that they were just playing
George really doesn't really matter so
the things that they can blind and kind
of because there's always an opening
again on girls are at stake and what was
also very nice it's in the scale of
children so if I stand here and like
this and which is 20 different even
their last time no such peace park
features and park and structure filming
and this especially local guide
lovebirds trying to hype the non-married
couple don't want to be seen in the park
which is difficult because it's a very
popular backdrop for Freddie I only went
and I'll project which we taking the
Lannisters and labels fascism which is a
which are showing professional and
fashion monopolies in the skill building
in very strange surrounding on the river
spey this tactic where is also like this
party rather than the walls so this was
in the east part his old pork-belly
which fortunately our were still
existing but that's how one side and
that the competition was to break is
shown for this fashion which is offering
shows is robust and he's my beautiful
old harbor building which is basis
anything
the doctors that you seem very very
iconic old building and they would have
liked to so for us it was the idea when
we got his footprint for a computer 4240
was very intelligent Qube and which we
have to fill it was perfectly multiply
can mark stone such as non oriented
extremely heavy heavy languages groups
defined construction so that's where we
start to go through different ways of
coming out of the structures is also
great things to sort of flexible space
which is creating of every night all
week so at some point we would come up
with the idea of having two different
arches which is long allowing to sort of
a spatial art and the second one which
is allowing for all the dots across this
was unhappen facing an ear of the space
which is great in Tucson and which is
also breaking diverse place and it kind
of is grant quite easily and that's how
we mentioned that it could be good and
this is an image
the rendering at the time at the same
time you wanted in a cell which is in a
way for option and showing that and
virtually but also like a fabric blanket
like a road respectively with this idea
of both of these fashions and these are
tending to concrete elements brief that
and it's a very simple technique because
it's adding everything which is security
compliance everything's not to be seen
as having out there on the water is a
main entrance garden route clearance if
you enter it on the ground there's a
multi-purpose event on the ground is
also the families by a streaming and
petition of arch which is allowing them
for giving head of uses and upstairs is
the stanley kibrik of these themes from
green structure which is then for
example poonam day of course if they're
popular you're very naughty
my ankles right signal to what they
offered but who have lost just cordial
have a until adopt them how they use it
is very different English they're an
essential food any and this is root
chair as a shuttleship we had some
movement because it was actually really
chin building in general to be called
show pending to the show as there and
with a signal that we could build stare
which is linking always a difference
based again the adapted the same there
is a circle which is a rotating and we
again justice trap so kawaii applies the
same shapes as life itself a language
for for each of building a career trying
to test so it will be green and centos
time reality intricate ways because it's
really self support is you the tree does
anything on paint the paint from people
built it and which is not raining this
quite beautiful space linking this
interior spaces together and it's quite
narrow dark enduring
so this is a dear one of the things we
ideas problems and so it's decided my
dear an important in our office also has
also get there like when you think of
the years
Dana project which means i mentioned
before this new platform which is at the
end of a long journey we're literally
around the time that holy showing me
from Easter are walking so different
architects and artists and fans were
very welcome young and good architects
from from Spain and so this trail and to
render which is so we see this is
extremely awkward and some people are
carrying
the daughters of the protein stays every
way of looking at the path train death
on here the stain that half-open church
manager also a given system lose our
bacon which did a couple shelters where
people just can put their mattress and
wash himself and see for a couple hours
or later on this is what we they imagine
this really is a constant flow of people
very beautiful ring of plants and Penny
concrete using her worship England
really insulation by or
when the floating book where you can
walk in our idea was that we have
something that we break that bond so
that people can come and sit down or
they can go up so that they can come up
here sit down and once again at the time
we were just finishing it were some are
very interested in this moment where
these arches are will ask this like
those interesting that the government
when it becomes free dimension and so
that we thought we have some images of
you we have at their food can we not
come up with this project which is like
a ball which is like almost rotating so
we came up with a new four circles which
are creating is an starting spine kids
so which is in the just exactly this
moment and this was in the object and
where's
happy to build that bond to a mocha hear
all the song yours is actually the same
so we trying to reduce the complication
of the building to the maximum so just
Bank having different and that is
encircled the openings of course change
in there which we always use the same
for more and so that's how it looks them
inside and astonishing them I think this
problem bowling or data structure which
looks the closest in commercial reality
we were really astonished
mexican English this was shown wish
mother were two years ago where he was
following a group of people
so some moments are more busy some real
estate but we see
one of the conditions that we somehow
like proof
so it gets really playable at the top
some people take have spring break so
they spray their family
they crave it or the Japanese traced and
then India but just this was beginning
I think it's exactly about this what
this is about is taking over and so you
see this bridge situation where on that
point of the hill you have a fantastic
view from Cambridge
and you may be silent movie
okay so so you see that the people thank
you from to do in danger
staircase which is taking or not and
anything that in that uniform that's our
example another project which we would
call it away in an approach no design is
a building in upstate New York which we
did in celebration in final images of
art form which is a very beautiful piece
of land it's about an hour in york city
of second a chronic high rate maybe 20
minutes from you Linkin there's a
maintenance and there's Orion
instructions that there's a main house
business and showed courage for our
kamiya moments no no founding gotcha so
we were looking around at some point we
found his great engineer steel and
easily put together and which are quite
cheap he left for agricultural and
purpose
and we were discussing I already
happened we come up with something
because on that line there was already
different that are in a more scalable
and the park and then we thought that
something resolved it's a linear element
could be quite interesting and so we
talked to you in the companies producing
them and they started we didn't wrong so
designed there's nothing we design is
not one gold which we son can design and
we just talk how they should be built
together so they're actually three
platforms in the living and the ramp
which is following them following that
curve of the author of the hill that's
how it Eric's laying there and also
inside we just mutilated it is very
cheap balance when everything is covered
and so that when you have been only
three windows the north it's actually
quite right solution prime but has a
ready
you feel the field agent just by walking
out in da vale and so it has a strange
people some people will want to start to
sing no don't you start to make me over
because I disagree we feel and space
where you just repeated in Kurt's little
bit and because everything is slightly
you'll see all the materials is actually
bright brighter this in the storage part
and this is the sort of
mrs. artists also this is marcus is
another building between that Justin
long future between the same tank bill
where we almost literally trying to do
somehow relate the meat or the demand
for young American country has in the
same side you were lucky enough to build
a second have such as I adored senator
guest a specific were jumping off off
the hill why change in interior space
where you always see different places
and decisions at same time a very
different building with a different
Church of the different understanding of
irony open finishes as a great retreat
just to finish or grin for
religious I felt it was just if you have
already been there which is just in the
work is strange images which all the
oldest architects and from a building
this is now almost finished our song so
there are all these buildings like Frank
Gehry like an Albanian build it on the
ground campus building and it was an old
labor and industrial area and the land
we found or have four different side
portofino passes one of them was the
very bad shape that we have to take them
and to gain some space and took out that
old circulation space and we just could
one new separation in the back with the
result that now each door you have an
interesting combination from a and new
this is actually longer it became that
one different apartments not one not two
apartments are
same so the idea was having they were
redoing the park and it was like trying
to have another facial sort of Queen
space or tree images and making the
connection from the part is new
structures or the Solarians along and
this is how it looks today so this is
our other medium and elements and
ultrasound on that present which is
about to be refinished and so which is
done in a way that it always goes out so
each each possibility you had a few
along the road and into the campus and
onto internet new park in the back needs
it's just that L medium and Underwood i
think is leach large and that's how it
works and the business of trying to
leave as much although the government
the existing the movie library mentioned
we just offered and his base and people
start to squat in extension groups and
use it
all in the different way and if you see
doesn't say
new a new entrance with his own use
elevator and staircase in the corner and
here is the restaurant which you'll soon
be finished it gets a little bit painted
but that small assistance old old
gymnasium training Florence which time
the show Mr Morrison
they were separated by long and short
horn sounds they make it out so it's
actually funny first we thought we would
see still time for Rathbone everything
after it was already taken part so
that's how I get very happy there does
looks like funny and instead of the
entrance if you go into this corner
situation where all before they were the
toilets in the bathrooms and they said
we kept all the building of these so
that you could endanger the corner so
that's the situation we found that can
be porn and have a very large apartment
and people were actually being cooked
choose where they wanted to put to put
there were three locations for example
in kitchen could be I think it could all
Jews else could choose the materials of
the walls where they want you have
subdivisions obsession in World
Championships law or shouldn't master
and we all consider the Sailor are to be
given control again but we all go in
control the custom done at the people
seven those hammocks thing connecting to
the old for example where you can see
the old existing has the over and short
that's the concrete which is dozens of
you our top of popcorn and see the ears
were originally used in a way we offer
young family and rich in just
Oh
getting a report for the department
would go young ec Adams prefer standards
and then refold annual
this distillation on come to the arm all
these elements all the families dr.
Richard concrete perfect in all the
subdivisions free
first right well this is an alarm the
last floor apartment and again the year
that in all the subdivisions of spaces
are just upwards and composites and wood
and it's hard to see
question
have to follow various foreign the old
building between the old sacrosanct it
sounds and still in the workshop
so each of the apartments each of the
outdoor spaces is always stream specific
extremely different and what the least
makes me very much about the people who
live there are three different regional
therefore Marcus
give people course oh bleep moment here
by living somehow re finding the ratings
people and at least
and another project which mean almost
and succeed in meeting the client is it
wasn't Siri
need to use commercial and housing
project with a strange program with an
all different kinds communal living and
on Studios excelled and here we had us
coming out they are very rigid served
courtyard building if lon students could
be built that you can also combine them
in different doors to larger living so
Islam back extensors large and I'm
almost an here shelves which you can use
it different different usage decision
that apartment so this would be for
example is longer than the decor need to
shout it's well 12 meter interior space
Corps small vacuum on set there's no
pattern in the other side bottom which
is held in circulation a slang Oh height
for to offer additional type of and ears
so this would they would be and in a row
and for example certain three different
types won't end
you can studio with working space and
make up the other side bedroom / the
room or something where you can use the
over at least a spark for storage then
breaks and sort of been attacked and I
difference which is producing some
privacy towards the circulation which is
a between magical piece on my face with
the bathroom bedroom or like a more
conventional type of living in the
kitchen you England which we can look
like a wet paint at the park and this
was unfortunately only word again yeah a
lot of these cases where me almost were
there
Dylan Norman part report for testing
sendiri work totally different way
unfinished is this very small chief
rival and sin family house where the
family with three kids or somehow they
had three days and I won't
did we get into posts and often mercier
expensive so we have to find a local
builder which mr. green houses and what
we did we just we have to find some of
these I hope enough to put things
together in the side of every way so we
just took whatever material we were
thinking is interesting they have they
have concrete in the handbook and that's
an okay with us and so we had a very
simple man with concrete stair in the
middle and two gratings few different
lab spaces and rivet the servants we can
delay your foot which is then on the
outside and just great in terms of
service holds basis which is then used
for usage as were just sons nationals
and we were looking at it now because
again you followed just gauging the plan
and allocating the materials and some
instructions how to put it together this
been having with
Beatrice is wrong untreated wood and
concrete loss that's practically them
together a revelation project which I
think long distance a glance and is a
particular work on wall which is this
project which was would not be the gamut
by one half boat and the city will
purchase day or one-half of a lawsuit in
which is so good having the first hour
in the road the idea is that you create
a topic problem he would come in landing
in a circle and go down and get you take
it and then you go up in the North
generator and from there in queens and
round of different tools and soon
related topics service among both
parties are different rules understand
how you relate this to this program
which is relating an extremely
interesting section an extremely
interesting situation very walk and then
you see one's income to the fiction
insinuating to the people of the shark
and then you can see people looking down
same time or we see on to them today and
the triple to the sea is more corals and
very interesting and very interesting
crazy section where you really would
start and top of it and walk these are
the cubes where people walk and all the
rest silent service soon or
less than the cross section reason is
that the entrance level where you come
from the city and then you go in where
see ones for first angle alpha value the
wrong goddamn is published positives in
the shark for the first half again this
sort of anything from you not coming
Spence which
and its startup I gave you know it was a
lot of discussion
because the thing is this is a lot to a
statement issued and all this and the
thing is that the savant and places
where families in their homes so they're
pretty powerful and beautiful silver
tiara communication checker another
litter cases of the robot down there and
this would be like them like that the
first marks them in the sea of sewage
actually starch in the park and then
making of the 10 mins walk begins and
the brief was clear that they were at
the end in the app which is at the same
time
the same very version the ground now the
project is this so that's was a how long
two batches and then now we were very
locking it and found two recently which
is in there were little things I think
bring things together which me which
mean you're working on a relationship to
to walk me natural instinct and what we
will do some tests are specifically
there in interesting canvas object on
when we have
so this is a large team of malaria the
Silurian Council which the very end
point I'm used to have sort of broadway
suite and so it's an interesting
which are happening here just a few so
did pass laws to their sin and sunny and
time so b is building on top that
transit building refurbishment and the
nucleic acid and have them all which
just not built here their foundation
which is a housing crisis there's their
own archives which is an account and so
because it's such a transition phase for
the everyday at this time of day we know
that for now we don't know how it's
going to be in the future so and they
had a very good condition lewis chest
just let me keep it as that we be just
sort of you the more education on the
way to make it and we will a large
structure which is like the search broke
down which is offering all the time
for the old history walls and 15 and
become like a generator for optional
easily generated for the face so if the
one will you see that's that that's the
existing one which can be paying away
you need any more and less than you so
there still a train rolling through and
when the repeater purse is a space
monster is almost reeling from that is
two grams Leah that it becomes like a
round vertical load in part c with lots
of anchoring and also building
structures on top and underneath and we
have a year of connecting homebuilding
food site for an initial consultation
for parking and also break and
biophysical on to the root service but
also it's by the US bank
around and once a year because it's so
large is infused from the shell they
should have known that thanks antigen
obviously like from wherever you see you
looking so this would be the hotel the
extremum that you went home then it's
always some part parking space so which
is then of course and also this virtue
always we do again changing the form and
what was this strange shape was cleared
we need it because we we have to keep
this train by the grace of the bridge
structure which is going on top of it
and what we've always wanted you have
made perfectly spaced sort of this 91
all things on the ground on top all the
movements of connecting space were
together as one part and out part i want
to present the idea of creating the
usage
cultural guy and we came up with
different time usage so once would be
health and food abundance cultural
events and what we call well-being and
then service and saying overnight so
from the ground floor- very large farm
foreign farming which actually is
already selling business retail and so
this was important so all the rest which
is why his father so these are the units
and they wouldn't lead for example on
the ground floor different built in open
permanent long-term and pop stores and
restaurants and some and during phase
and I think
Ashley for each program they already
came up and it was obviously biased and
amazing way to do certain for example in
this face you would have still an
African veldt Park you know it would
maintain it black and come up with some
first shops hissing as we waved away so
this is NSF supporting and for the
different users the only thing we have
to do I mean I am we already have
welcoming and they are everything in the
building the exemption that we have a
slide over this is still much more much
cheaper than then in comparison to
evolving this thing's individuals which
we have more it's not so much so on the
back side now working from the design
very service
is New York's been doing in this week
there something that commendation so we
offer the series together with totally
one from Berlin series of sports and
fields and sports pop-up stores which
are non-starters so that the people in
the students in town by there and what
was extremely working through this at
the year and his urban machine at the
beginning already and father grams or
and immediately a public every free
programs can be offered and acknowledged
a reference which way is obviously
in the production into Lena and so
there's this is random very good bye doc
you can walk up and again uniform to go
here that transition over there so this
you see all that is within the Parkinson
so here and we have elevators we have
all shafts with all the word elements we
need which are close enough that you can
goons this would be a hotel and without
regimented broke off in this way and
this to the roof where make you will
often form together with this pharma
company which is there than our sins and
their soda part in the event of this
this platform at the end or imagined
this is like one first elements to be
build a bear so that
you started by saying
so do
I think that's already feel everyone hey
got me a little more specific so it
seemed like in the early working in the
current work you're always part of a
curated collection right from jun hwa to
the pilgrimage site to competitions or
the adjacency to the novartis projects
and i guess i wonder which seems a
little bit contradictory to the
pragmatism argument because we want to
build the daddy thing anywhere you
showed a few those impressions but maybe
more in the realm of this time part of a
larger curated collection that is
clearly that different has a different
architectural profile
and the practice except we want to build
I mean
and
coming our way falls behind
all the students
in addition in Europe residents with
some eats the building competition from
young firms it's in a way easier to get
into internships construction area so
that while other students will engage
with and do computations whatever and we
were just trying to go
of course
I am interested to go back to the theme
of the unfinished and looking at the
quality of your work which is rough and
raw in many cases that ends up in the
finish of the project also but we're
also learning that to keep a concrete
ball bra means to stuff because we know
I mean at least I'm providing you a
little bit in the local context so that
you can sort of provide your context for
us but given that materials are
relatively economical in proportion to
the labor that goes into the crafting of
work are you confronted with this
contradiction and with this from as you
under detail and you kind of under
finish your buildings but then our are
cornered into the into the challenge of
getting the syntax and the conditions
absolutely architectural and perfect as
they appear to be forcing the budget
back up or how do you what are some of
the challenges in doing minerals and
basically
question I think what the main lessons
we learned that what is expensive and
what was cheap as culturally
and finish finishes but from a bomb two
three four fours like The Very Fine Very
fine surgeons their own direction that's
one thing and for this four boxes
filling just a one pager Valentine
construction in being upset York refers
we were
still see that
he came out totally
and then actually just wouldn't believe
that the way and delivered it was the
way you want to have it and we will have
been perfectly happy
Oh
the other
our estimate
yeah of course
experience
imagine but I mean
it's just impossible codes and all
things in terms of insulation up imagine
so for us in a regular ranked
reorganized really seem to show exactly
for a reason and we can majan what we
achieved early but the things that yeah
there's a group if then you ask for the
contractor for the hundred or two
instruments that binds is literally
exactly the same it just doesn't care
and which character code
people have enough to build just doesn't
change anything so yes it's always a
fight that's really great which means
this angle rockers really leads to
achieve approaching or is that in just
more work to have the image of the rock
which again is exactly the same Franklin
and this is awkward to quantify it's not
so easy granted some of it works out
Society practical question
and
how so so we have been students under
the alga great Susan image so we know
that you have mentioned several times to
explain the relationship of master
and
so young girls how are you guys your
forties going to do a sound generation
or against your masters we're going to
continuous tradition extended to the
aging and I really cute or what would
happen with through some potential
because the European traditions are
culturally have lived and scrutiny
decisions in the most celebrated strong
spec for example our tradition has been
vamos dismantle thankfully so our
generation
to continue any kind of tradition in
media card but you guys in in
Switzerland still extend society to show
the question how do the young architects
say the shadow especially for
that's a very long it's hard to most
things ever imagine that
don't try to be also to play I mean I
relations and reference Bernardo
presumably trying to come up with hiding
that we are somehow influenced by a
severe internal possible it's all out
there it's on each and we can google our
alien is in there it's constantly time
and at the same time of course I mean
for us we were in a strange position is
also why we have to go out and do things
because we have like this the generation
of architects which are one of the half
generations of solid there was a woman
in Switzerland and they all had to build
you see me after practice
jumping out for the first time afraid
and people share so that's liquid how we
felt that's also how we made a multiple
we connected with all people in all this
equation which way via not only always
to accent it
it's really fascinating to see the
drawings for the project in China how
you actually drawing mode to create
those holes the building apart sorry
sirs um because um my dad was a cream
truck my dad's a contractor so i be
knowing a lot of a contractor stories in
china and I mean China is a huge
disjunction between architect and
contractor is being an ongoing problem
but also i started efficiency so on a
different culture look relax of
different um so I'm real curious about I
kiss you really want to feel
internationally also one of the
challenges will be forever standing is
how you browse upon like the roll up in
architecting different cultural contexts
and I'm very curious about how you
adjust yourself on the even cover
complex and how you communicate with the
contractor and the client are we
different cultural contexts mentioned
before when we come to play on specimens
I mean trying to follow
firstly we're rockin people and you can
have to
Oh
try to figure out what actually and will
be nobody somehow in mountain Germans
special sign
this is staffing the low
and
sometimes you need the cultural
translate in China for this case many
people of those process alegre way
because it just had this idea of
bringing people together and show and
having networking to the people
councilman something start and this
primitive together
but we convert good neighbor
authorship also hunting elephants or
lost everything because it's already
going after fight finding 20 years we
have to find
so this guy cares for them they're like
I always have to say which is a friendly
