including perfect device architects book
in 97 to renew in the year types like
local burger by the side reaction with
the grades in front end before in 1973
the widest versus great conference of
easy of 1897 for the eighth of shoes
issue of many 75 when creative de Porres
the ashes of preferences by architects
one year's data solution at University
Meredith for the sea spots architecture
or tengen toppa 2010 right at the market
is notorious ghost it would be hard to
say that the whites and grays debate
suffered from a lack of attention yet
now more than four decades after the
publication of defined architects book
is a good moment to return once again to
do this country to return to the moment
that has been identified later as the
shape from a tourism to close button
exactly because we have to
ginger examining reacts Emily to work on
your side and place what was happening
at this very moment and in the context
of the cave entrance this panel allows
us to visit the earliest moment of the
debate the promo what was actually going
on and to do kc things in 1969 and 90s
everyone in girth having the
protagonists of this episode here at
mythos city is it only of their special
occasion but also a great honor and it
is also hear that Michael Graves who was
supposed to be your business today in
this specific panel during AP Rhys
Thomas react into discussion will be
drinking this case as an idea and as a
Packers time for a series of
transformations begins the education to
the case meeting of Maine 1969
immediately thought of by the eastern
plains as they marked by one such a
problem it did not meet the needs of the
members kiss seven was an attendant
responded requirements on his letters or
again in towards of the invitation to
establish game as a purposeful mechanism
the lethal taking place in Roma was
organized by the new york-based groups
consisting at the moment of empty earth
people are kind of this year as a new
heaven friend and michael graves which
admire afternoon and robert scott see it
takes them to the patronage of curator
architects various co-sponsored by the
density
two years later invented 71 there was
nothing to eat again at moma to get
organized by the New York a spur that
these meetings actually did manage to
function as a purposeful mechanism can
be seen on the opportunities to five
architects and urban land between the
lights and grace what kind of problems
it keeps half at this particular moment
would work in these of its members in a
90-68 letter for Iseman to not a
botanist of today Thomas freedom as a
man described case and we heard his
earlier today as a rather ugly child
ill-formed and without direction yet
Issa hates it so be very useful to allow
me to send my itunes doesn't criticize
introducing for other in other words a
real forum for dialogue and exchange
about gifts and this is precisely how
the two occasions each function as a
forum to criticize and to talk about 30
projects of its members so rather than
talking about abstract being such as
perception creativity or politics and
architecture as a previous case meeting
stood in case seven architects present
their work by showcasing their dog this
is our not to say that there was no fee
the organizers of the 960 970 have
specific
when they chose these are connected
future wife to present their work it
represents a specific idea a specific
direction in idea execution for
architecture implications to basic
education to incomplete dress trips we
can only try and attempt to capture that
is feared would happen that we can be
made any 69 and tears data in a 90
second one and when the members of your
case together for Jimmy eighty percent
of their work at this time eisenmann
near come from to a business husband
Prince zinan was working her constitute
it was several years after affinity and
incumbent and I was working for wall
with his future world Richard Meier
already started his own office and
cooking house in essex house with its
curving white earth walls business house
in Connecticut and the Hoffman house
michael graves had worked on the
hanselman house Indiana after returning
from a spirit of American Academy room
Hayden was already teaching at Cooper
Union at the time after teaching in
Austin review out of Texas Rangers here
to note the date draws was me here on
the left instead of time in Europe
working for comment as ghosts of words
in Paris after attending Yale had
completed the sharply angled housing
block group and I guess it works care
what was addressed in these meetings
unsurprisingly the transcripts show that
various aspects not associated with a
518 conversation one of these issues is
defies relationship
you're being a circle of incur if you've
got to negotiate and he received really
discuss finish line and I think he's a
tiny or as the architect Richard
Henderson said in concession for all
important Club it was of course on the
road would argue instincts introduction
to defy par texto that the psychological
recedes architected elegance it's pure
abstraction but not with social content
when you're in my architecture came to
infiltrate in the United States Kelly
Rowland raked it was introduced as
simply a new approach to building and
I'm much more that case it was
introduced largely purged of its
ideological or societal content and
began minimal not as an evident
manifestation of socialism in some form
or another but rather as a Dakota daddy
four Greenwich Connecticut or a suitable
premier for the corporate activities of
the nineteen activism and can he earthly
brought up an other aspect in the medium
according to him that architecture
presented here expressed not quite as
Dean but simply lack of interest in a
necessity to meet even work now needs of
a house either a social or building
program which is seen as being entirely
submissive to the poetic interpretation
of the spatial it was hard work part
another part of the conversation was
taken up by discussions about pictorial
and digital space concerns about the
visual
action for how you er approaches in
books after building the work of
prosecco crowd so is that an MIT but the
use of metaphor for computer Oh states
were mentioned but of course also call
you Anne Roberts loves these two favors
transparency they turned phenomenal
articles the articles for the
inspiration for the theme of case 8
pictorially difference means it was
visual complexity row and sucks they
were after they gave out half the sod
services could to save multiple readings
of patterns in the day of keeping beyond
movie what followed in 1972 5 articles
published and this is really the first
time these architects have published or
Jesus is how Michael Graves would
remember a year later in 1973 Robert
stirred market during Charles Moore
claim Robert north robertson and Lamar
voter calabria took an architectural
form to white architectural 25 the
grades as they would become known after
death had an important case and turns
resin at the first meeting but it left
perfecting stator position stating that
if it wouldn't be too architecture
permissions in brother not joining in
1974 Thomas Tremont organizer today did
you see an ad to us and grades moving
east coast discussion to the other side
of the country and here we see from left
to right Tim Prentice 30 lonesome Cesar
Connie Richard Meier talking and Charles
Moore Michael brace for the Sun bobster
through the secular and income streams
at this meeting the color code was
excited with the so-called Silver's
architects concerns of high technology
today it is a pleasure to introduce to
you right margin here as women and
screaming Frank Martin who will moderate
the panel is professor of architecture
come--it university where he directs a
temple for you I'll subject where to
study American architecture he's also
from the grow editor of the journal gray
robe and a starfish YK on the history a
theory of learning architecture his work
centers on histories of space bar and
incentive imagination particularly as
needed mediated by technical
infrastructures related areas of
research includes architecture and
physiology localization cities and media
history here I zealand is an
internationally recognized architect and
educator reward radiological housing and
urban design projects in traffic
facilities or educational institutions
and series of inventive pragmatism
tester career at susie's on prior to
establishing the full time with the
different preference in 98 mr. eisenmann
worked as an independent architect
educator and theorist in 1967 he finally
came to dupe architecture urban studies
which wasn't worth it and serve as its
there at Durham t92 current ated jaws
watch me professor and practice of the
Yale School of Architecture mr. Ottomans
epidemic career goals includes DJ
Cambridge things didn't Harper the
defining chemistry it is an architect
and an educator
his VA and the other from Yale
University and 7th episode both he work
with new becomes taught at Penn
University and was chair of our electric
universe from Mexico he was also the
first chair that mark program if you see
a baby 1968 in 1974 Freehan organized a
circumference of white versus degrades
four silvers and the following year he
was busier Turkish American Academy
wrote please join me in welcoming
working
what we are going to do thank you I
hadn't decided I didn't know what I was
going to do until I heard two panels and
now have some sense with what I would
like to do and most of them to be a
personal recollection I got out of the
army 1957 when who worked for personal
Goodman in New York where she was a
teacher columbia ice last of the year or
so there but i got a job in my real the
heart's desire wasn't working for walter
gropius the architects collaborative
effect Thompson and I thought I had
finally reached heaven and it was to me
what would be the epitome for young
architect and it was there that I had an
enormous disappointment that I realized
that these guys were no better than any
of the other commodify errs that you
could find
working on two buildings at brandeis
doing the detail right there was nothing
in this that was what I thought it was
going to be so I went back to rehearsal
Goodman any said look you can spend your
life working your way up attack becoming
a junior partner partner or etc or you
can come back and do a master's degree
here and learn something perhaps about
architecture it's there I decided to do
that I had been accepted in an IT but I
decided to return to New York some
reason even though i really loved living
up here and fortunately in my class was
michael mcconnell and that's what led me
to tell this story because also one of
Michael's friends have been to columbia
year before John Fowler who later work
for Paul Rudolph and Kevin Roche and
others died young but a fantastic talent
Fowler had been a student of I'm going
to tell the slightly different stories
and Michael about a counter got to
England and I'm not sure it is memory
you say so I don't think I've done d I
we had a dinner in New York of an
evening in November of 59 with jim
sterling who was the first english
professor that had come over to Yale
which would later become the davenport
and gym later took that John had been a
student of James I believe that the
reason street he came to dinner we show
to the work we were working on and for
some reason Starling said Hannah this is
really good work and he looked at me is
the other guys clearly knew something
about architecture and he said that you
don't know anything about architecture
you ought to go study with column row
the kennel never would told me to go to
college road that's for sure is not
really on the side of the Angels bro it
was sterling who like Rove and that's
why I went to be with row and what
follows is a three-year audition in
Cambridge 22 years 90 days and 90 nights
listening to Colin read to me from
various books I learned about the pickle
on many Popes and how many what the
stamou were for the reds on oak Oh
Pope's and things like that completely
uses information
I became full of it still I can still do
that stuff right I don't know and I
learned how to over the same books that
common road open to the same pages all
those books and i received a certain
education well when I realized when I
was in England coming in contact with
his missus and Sterling and people like
a lesson Martin that there was a level
of morality to architecture and I would
call it a morality about what was done
and how it should be done that didn't
necessarily deal just with housing or
housing the indigent but dealt with the
whole idea of the relationship
architecture to culture to an ideology
of of capital really and that became
really important to be as an English of
rub off on my whole being was not
Italian was not Spanish it was not
French or German who was English so with
before I also believed that the USA in
1963 when I came back was an
intellectual and cultural and
ideological void in architecture
represented by walter gropius what
Michael I i arrived at Princeton to the
463 michael has been we had met in Rome
in 62 and in Cambridge in 59 and Stan
and I had met in Columbia and also
namath that it was important to do
something beyond teaching and the idea
between Michael Tim who was a signature
on the first project of case was we
needed to put together a bunch of young
architects and and we went to the
President of Princeton the fact that a
junior professor clear-coated overfed
president Princeton Duncan and asked him
for money unheard of today but we were
able to get 25 or 30 thousand dollars I
imagined for two meetings at Princeton
and we said about getting people what we
wanted to come I remember it's not a
very funny story because I grown up with
Richard Meier second cousin and being
two years full of meaning in high school
enormous difference immunity on people
who were two years younger than so and
so Michael said the other person player
and I said I remember saying hey Michael
this isn't a friends group this is good
architects Richard and I have remained
friends ever since but and Frampton and
I music nominee and the indian
restaurant on Charlotte Street in London
called natraj Kenneth was famous for
indian food and briefly by the way and
we had decided that if we could start
something in the United States Kenneth
will come you've never been over and we
got some money and decided to have his
flu count for weekend which is totally
wacko and because he was an editor of AD
and we had put together a really
interesting people i talk about we
grieve around with smoking cigars
playing pool playing like we were the
top of the world since there was no
other world we could have been and we
met at princeton and it was i think was
a very useful
he is I certain things but on Sunday
morning the first break in a theoretical
idea of modern architecture or
architecture in the United States
occurred when Scully and venturi left
and they left for ideological reasons
there was not wasn't because and Vince
had come to take over the leadership of
the young American architects he was
going to be the leader of America first
and it was quite clear that some of us
had different ideas the MIT people as a
matter of fact and the Princeton people
it was a very strong idea that that was
not going to happen and this started two
things one it started the Yale and axis
by the way which was very strong with
part of Tam and white he was there to be
sort of a flick about the whole thing
but it also started the Cornell
Princeton taxes because Colin roe came
and Michael had never met Colin and it
was a an enormous influence immediately
between if you notice the change in
Michaels work for the meeting con I'm
fun Oh Randy too common Rose grabs a
month before his signature changes to
the form you see a lots of interesting
little touches that you have to watch
for in this moment but venturi and and
and Scully leave because they don't want
to talking
solution they want an action institution
and that's the first real ideological
break in American art to be followed
this is 64 bob was working on complexity
contradiction which to be is the first
theoretical book on American
architecture in the at least after the
war if not in the 20th century well I
mean I don't know what you do with
Gideon's book but this is truly it's a
statement of what a an American contract
let's say would be it's very different
densities is booked in 72 morning from
Las Vegas which is a completely
different thing and of course the
difference between 66 and 70 to the
speed but 72 is when the five architects
book comes out and there's definitely a
split so from 66 and say the two
meetings at in New York case one and two
then they're the two meetings at MIT
Rhydian for there's five which occurs
and in the kitchen in Oregon then there
is a meeting in New York which were
shown on the slides which has no title
but talks about a new york case and
again I asked Sam
he knows the history but there was some
sense that we needed more regional very
blessed to be able to meet more often
and whether that was a subterfuge for
suggesting that we needed a different
attitude toward built work or the
ideology of built work of immorality of
that build work in any case it led to
case 7 which has not been shown we don't
have the documents for k-7 but k 7 was
the first meeting of the five architects
only they weren't five than it was six
and it was a meeting that Joseph
Griffith was active on road without the
gym sterling was that Arthur direction
was at MoMA and six architects showed
houses the sixth person was a Texas
Ranger from Collins camp called bill
Ellis who was also at the Institute and
the reason why bill wasn't in that case
8 was because he didn't have a second
house and so the case aight was a
follow-up the next year with the same
cast of characters and there was this
material sitting there for basically
seven and eight i used to go to George
Wickham orange book store I'm not an
active with my kids on saturday
across town George had one of these old
European bookstores and I said he
Georgia got a great idea for a book for
you said what I said you know we had
these meaning think we've got these
tapes let's do a book and we said okay
said let's but let's call it cardboard
architecture now carport architecture
was my term and so when I got back we
got the rest of the guys together the
whites they said hey we don't want to be
called cardboard architecture we don't
want to be called anything we're not a
group we don't really like each other
too
arguments that we had about producing
this book you know if Jack Roberts who
knows why did you put me out as good as
guys and you know horse a lot of back
and forth about the five market export
it came to the fact that you had a color
page you got one page less if you had
ten pictures as opposed to nine you got
one day it was it was a madness the way
it would get it we hired a young book
designer we said we wanted a hardback
book and we ordered the print run so it
wasn't a publicity stunt the print run
was 500 the initial crema we got 25 of
his hardcover books that came in they
were terrible I mean you know the covers
were like this and you realize we can't
do a hardback book so we said nope we're
going to do a soft back book and we'll
make the order 750 because we're no
longer doing hardback books we didn't
think anything of it until and this is
the way the world happened in those days
I was sitting at breakfast reading the
sports page and breakfast in my young
son at the time is sitting there and
looks up daddy
big picture you gotta be kidding there
was this article by Paul Bo burger
called the big five I and of course we
weren't the big five we were just dumb
five and New York's big five does
architecture or something like that well
this got burned the hell out of lobster
I can remember whose bananas so he said
I got a great idea came to me with this
I they said look we didn't cook up the
things to make this thing really go and
call it whites and grays and it was
choreographed don't shake your head I
promise you want to hear the story
you've got the story and me we set the
thing up five on five and it was one of
the last issues of architectural form
that we had was great and it was
practically the whole issue and from
that point on there were white sand race
and it I think effectively until 10
comes along he's going to tell that
story with the whites the silvers and
cida point in the west coast and that
that's it another chapter he asked me
where was case 9 I haven't a clue I know
that tent was so symbolic of the
difference from 64 second one last thing
before Jen goes I gotta tell you about
the guy who threw the parties so we went
out to the west coast a lot of the whole
whites and grays and we met the silvers
etc and we gave lectures at UCLA I mean
it was like 10 days in May or something
like that it was like we teach in it das
place and the first night there was a
parking in a garage and who sent them hi
there this seems to own this garage from
the party I said he's an architect it
huh you know and I said well he's not in
this and he said no no no he's not a
silvery that he's a he's a developer
architect
and later
I want to go on record to say we didn't
keep Frank out of that maybe I did no no
I didn't keep Frank and so that was
really i think what i wanted to say i
believe a couple of things that there
was a resistance there wasn't Michael
Senate anger that calibrated into
something like case group y que scoopin
down today one there would be no
sponsoring institution number two
there's no voice of authority in other
words there were no big big guns around
today for anybody I mean what if what
our students react against today I don't
know but we were teaching in the 50s it
was right it was con whose core boobs
meets there were and then in the 60s and
70s it was sterling and rossi and
ventured and today there are no
authority so there are no resistances
and that's a big problem i think for the
for the situation we as teachers as
architects find ourselves
I was saying every time I go to Boston
and see Michaels building I say they're
in no way that anybody in the United
States in any state of mind would build
that building today impossible and so
great that would cost me my future
practice with him it was you know great
undertaking and I think something that
tells you the difference between a
moment in time men and the moment in
time today so then it come about Frank
here
thank you Peter oh this is the woman is
today I'll tell you why because as he
may or not notice I was present in all
the case meetings right through five and
then I seem to manage Bible asleep or a
meeting and the reason was that in 1965
I hit the road and went west first to
New Mexico or I was the three years and
then in 1968 to Los Angeles to UCLA so
all is this stuff that I left behind me
in New York I had difficulty following
and I suppose because I was busy
starting the department at UCLA and
other things keeping my practice going I
didn't have time to go back east and and
participate these things however
something didn't happen and it is case
10 so I want to tell you about case 10
oh this is our took place in 1973-74
Henry melon was director of the Academy
the american academy in rome and he
kindly invited me to be architected
residents to come to Rome for a year
well what an opportunity unfortunately I
was terribly busy both coat with with
the school and sending with my practice
my fledgling practice of and so I accept
Henry I'm about to turn you down because
i can't spend an entire year there he
said all right i know what we'll do I'm
announced Richard Meier if he would
share the residency with you and he'll
be there at the time and
the other it worked out it was great
Richard nicest fell each other and there
was one time when our visits overlap we
were both in Rome together and we were
talking about the old case days I was
curious about them he was bringing me up
to date and he said you know Jim I've
got an idea let's have another case
meeting and let's make this one in
California and you think you can get
your Dean to pay for it I said well said
you try it sounds like a very exciting I
dear so I went back to Los Angeles and
he went back to New York and contacted
this guy eisenmann and said here do you
think we can put this together let's get
all the old gang yeah there I'm going to
go out west and done capito does that
end of the story better than I did but
he did he did it a terrific job from the
list of participants with drug will read
you senator shortly Peter made one
stipulation about coming out to the west
coast are quoting from my letter there
should be a group of West Coast
architects teachers architect / teachers
equivalent to the existing case group to
meet them to act as a sounding board he
didn't want to come out there and he was
quite right talk to an audience know who
they were anything so this is how Cesar
Pelli and I can deform the silver we are
not reading more about that later the
Silva's were by definition is important
that you got this seven any grade the
French would architects with no ties to
the California region that was important
to us there are seen a if you will who
are teachers and articulate about what
they did and you stand up to their east
counterparts without being defensive now
having given you that definition of what
seizure on wedding would you have to
understand the front area did not fit he
was a local boy he graduated from USC we
did with a trotline right snow what do
you guys say anyway whenever you want to
see guys okay oh I was able to get the
money the the conference was on for me
at the four days in for four days in May
but I think there was a film at that
time for four days in May which had a
very sort of submissive theme and we
thought that sounded pretty racy for a
conference um we we I'm going to read
you very soon the list of people who
participated who came out there for the
conference and one of the people who
disappointing they did not come of
course and you've already mentioned this
yet he's bought venturini oh I I have a
letter here that ball wrote where he
where he explained why he didn't want to
be part of any of these groups he says
dear friend he's white and grey the
knees and I have been under pressure
from Boston to participate as Grey's in
the book to be called white and grey our
reason for not wanting to participate
our solos one we've already written
books some recently where we have made
our points these are available for
anyone criticizing use for comparison
restructuring this material to fit Bob's
format would be redundant a redundant
bore for us and I think for the readers
up to you don't think our recent writing
or designs fit into the category gray I
refer to sections one and two of
learning from Las Vegas now it was an
interesting backstory to learning from
Las Vegas when I was in New Mexico I
invited Bobby come out as an old friend
to come out lecture to my students my
wife to make him comfortable put a book
beside his bed he could read evening in
it happen to be Tom Wolfe school the
discard the signs of the name of it but
it is god no lo signs in if maybe of the
pumphouse cab well one of the early
tolerable books Bob read it was
fascination and said before i go back to
philadelphia man stopped off in las
vegas and as history was made at that
point he did stop off and he was
actually advising I don't you do this
Henry the rather than spend a year in
Rome the qualified students should be
spending a year in Las Vegas to really
learn about city driving a three and we
feel uncomfortable with the idea of
placing ourselves in explicit schools
and historical categories and would
rather leave that US post Yuri to
critics and historians we wince at the
request for example to make charts or
scenario diagramming opposition's visa
feed the development of architecture in
the last century also dialogues can get
Pam for example we all become gratuitous
participants in a tempest in a teapot we
all became fortuitous participants a
chemist at people on the recent record
articles before the book e-book God has
begun Bob Stanfield's we own something
and we're letting him down with grateful
for his help well why doesn't go read
any more of the letter but we he ends by
saying we see no reason why the book
cannot go ahead and think it should
please don't leave us the project to
stop us in the book was at the book okay
well oh thank you for that because
that's what I read in this book which
you told me I should breathe a lobster
and architecture on the edge of
post-modernism I had to read it to
refresh my mind what I happened during
all those years I said we could remember
Bob did happen to cover do a series of
essays that coveted and it's it's okay
and I understand that he had his own is
only did fees Oh in this book bob says
the white versus great abate with garren
at UCLA in May 1974 in other words he
means this symposium that I'm telling
you about I didn't know that
I thought whites and grays it was
established quite positively before that
oh I see so this that's right I don't
know that I mean we have enough cannabis
silver we'll get to that why will we
told soon because we really took it on
the network several times all right then
here are the participants in this
conference of the white group Richard by
I architect New York Charles gwathmey
architect New York Peter Eisenman
architect director institute of
architecture news bellies michael graves
architect and teacher princeton and when
is selling architect teacher at Cornell
he came out um now the grade list was
Robert stern architects New York which
one stone office of downtown plan in new
york Jocelyn Robertson vice president
Walden realty geo fasten Ella Tim
Prentiss and Charles would know this the
silvers that Cesar and I work together I
we tried to get this group that Peter
askis and we came up with Cesar Pelli
and his sidekick Tommy lumsden of paul
cannon from from the CRS the big his'n
firm Frank gifts and
who was with william pereira searchers
Craig Hodges a New Yorker who translated
himself to california and was attached
to Cal arts Eugenie copper who was on my
faculty at UCLA myself and william
mitchell who actually at this time was a
chair and the historians and critics
were calling row and Vincent Scully
Colin row representing the whites
Vincent Scully the grades now what was
the what was the conference like I think
the best way to begin to describe it I'm
going to read you from a progressive
architecture article of july that year
nineteen seventy-four it would be
difficult to imagine two more divergent
conferences than the two architectural
events the chaired the opening week of
med at one end of the country the
Harvard Graduate School of Design and
the Boston Globe sponsored a conference
on the professions of the built
environment while UCLA's opposed to
another kind of session or together in
the opening remarks at UCLA architect
Peter Eisenman referring to the hobbit
reading said those who are interested in
ideas are here those those are
interested in the management of the
oh well things may not have been all
that clearly divided the overall tenor
of the conference bore out what hasn't
been sitting in California however four
days in May we call therefore white
grade each wine Grammy silver drew
together a group interested in design
ideas and intentions some of those
attending applauded the fact that even
with the tightly tied university budget
UCLA put together a powerful cast and an
interesting program basically it was an
assembly of Eastern architects whites
and grays hosted by Western architects
to discuss design the aesthetic is
related to visual deception and
historical perspective everything else
was ruled out of order well the
definitive meaning of whites and grays
has not been written this is 1974 some
guidelines about their respective
characters it's a necessary White's
include you're familiar with the list
among the Grays more Gosnell emotion
robertson spirin and Hagmann venture
a.m. scott brown and wine Snow White's
seem to view architecture as high art
grey uses symbols of popular art that's
Las Vegas the differences are
ideological not formal White's appear to
believe in the capacity of form and
space to mediate between the individual
and his society / environment the
mediation is seen as idealistic rather
than pragmatic the idea of being an
effective Western cultural tradition
originating in Europe graves seem to see
these ideas more
terms of response to a specific program
or function they do not believe in the
mediation role but in architecture is a
representation in form of solutions to
practical problems both whites and
Gray's establish themselves from other
architects while they are a higher level
of concern for ideas and intentions the
Western mesillas got really exists as a
group from their viewpoint still the
host spokesman including Cesar Pelli
Craig objects copper-coated um student
and of course breland contributed a
great deal to the lively dialogue Kelly
felt that the domination of these
architectural ideologies was extremely
valuable and the dogma and personal
attacks were never problems during the
meetings in his view the conference was
outstanding not because the issues
covered but because so many practicing
first great architects would assemble to
talk about architecture freely in front
of others and to open themselves up to
questions lecturers to the whites and
grays were callin row and Vincent Scully
respectively Rose aborted the Marxist
view of the whites but how do you admit
feeling like all right like a Marxist
when confronted with so many large
single-family houses
Scotty discussed the new shingle style
architects in his lecture notes the
lessons learned from the Masters to be
taken from their early periods the
mistake of the bill avoir which is to
complete to be developed further okay
others in attendance to be sure felt
that all the whites and grays except
Robinson at once not do this these human
were with the lunacy administration
administering the city of New York were
precious object makers though not that
accusation came up often they can be
little doubt about the worth of the
meetings however attendance is very high
interest with sustained and those
present were nearly unanimous in their
enthusiasm it is hoped that the
processing might be shared with a still
larger audience either through
publication for editors utter um I'd
like to show you some pictures of the to
give it life so can we go back to the
beginning of the my set of size oh yes
notice students
yeah we we asked the students to pick up
our visitor and so they produced a great
car a white car and the silver I LAX to
pick up all their visitors and they were
really excited now what do i do to your
selections okay great here you see two
of our students in the front seat and
wisdom then our Charlie blossoming of
color row you see him just peeking out
from behind that poster and Peter on the
other side there will there in their
appropriate white car there were white
being motive to vacuum UCLA I did this I
think you've seen this picture already
this was taken in the courtyard of a
school during one of the breaks of the
conference and let let me identify
everyone for those of you who you don't
know oh can you give our boys a Tim
Prentice on extreme high off of extreme
left below him Tony lumsden the silver
Venice is gray of cesar pelli a simple
silver mater of Dean Yale and he still
lives in your club Oh Richard Meier in
the back of right beside him and below
and then Charles Moore a gray michael
graves of above with the doc classes
very California
win this back to us Auster and myself
now here stream of you straight right
there is Eugene company he was a silver
the others I've already identified this
is what we are all young and pretty
that's what I wanted to say he is
anything about this conference is that
you are sitting up there in your youth
looking down a wee us old fossils but in
fact in spirit and we are reliving when
what we were your age is it
juxtaposition you almost unrecognizable
and my bonus now this is a typical of
Peter hee hee where he adapts himself to
the native context right out
yeah sure I forget what you did beat up
or do you got it in the head of us you
sign up there lecture to the students
okay now i might do this is the
conference table but see how long it is
look green who all these people
are up at the farm right upon left let's
start there
the far right is the end of the table
I'm saying it right there oh I'm sorry
let's start the other end that's where I
got them listed Michael Gray sitting at
the end of the table next to him Richard
water next to him lobster next to him
Tommy lumsden in the light colored
jacket next alums and wats meeting next
cloth me is cesar pelli and then hot
hidden behind a vision in the foreground
is craig hodges it's myself in the
middle of the table Frank Dempster a
silver is up on my right next down f
william mitchell who is also a silver
and what what he he can MIT evening when
he left us here at MIT giovani ogio
coccinella next to him in the white
t-shirt or the white sweater and then
Charles Moore just 10 partier wait Jim
Prentice again paul cannon he just the
fellow from from houston a silver from
houston just behind the business
standing in front of him and find a
Eugene cover at the end of the table
tell us oh now where did you see this
thing you love this up let me identify
the people here not Robinson Robinson in
the glasses with his back to you on the
left-hand edge talking to Craig
hardships and sort of staring Robinson
and above him his men Dorian who was a
they would they were partners that job
all the way down here is Richard
Weinstein you can just see the top of
his head now this is what I a party that
was given a house that more had just
completed the bleep earns and it was
taken from the staircase looking down
he's a belly stands in the middle of the
picture and waving at you is where to
selling now who's above gonna something
right Carrie exactly so Frank was very
very much a part of this conference in
fact he enjoyed it enormously he turned
up for everything and he's talking to
Paul Kevin it's done it oh I can't
remember when Philip Johnson got his
gold medal
tell me but the reason I say that is
because it was Philip came out to the
west coast and he heard about this
fellow Gary and he knew that he better
come out right away because he was
rocking the boat and so he asked me to
take him to see the wrong Davis house
that bracket is finished and so we went
out there and Frank Mathison week rolled
around in it and then dulcimer Falcon
and it very shortly after that ugly if
he got his gold medal and when he got
his gold medal he invited at the two as
his guests as his special guests most
many of the whites and grays was
probably quite a few some of you n'ya
were repeated you said they were in that
group which room ice about you
technically the lineup was but it was
one west coastin the World War East
Coast is one west coaster and I was
crying Eric so in a sense oh he did it
Gary just finished his house so he was
just doing his house it in 74 end of
Johnson's of niacin
and so in a sense Frank is going on
okay that was fun so we can thank you
but I want to thank organizers
convenience on that Maria Risk Reduction
and into the standard for providing the
archive that has actually called us
together here and so indeed that and the
spirit through it hurts me that that
will be heard that part is the cars the
album covers the excommunications Tucson
so forth but their little bodies and and
and so you know in some sense you've
confirmed what has been historically the
interpretation of this is that this was
a debate about not now we don't agree
with them
there is something that's it but I think
so in the spirit of this
since archive electric don't be there
recording everything that we study is
evidence it can send here so click so I
think it probably is my job to extract
as much evidence as possible it's not
there the party nobody buddy yeah you
guys here to ask you guys something some
question so so the question I you know
actually believe I remember from the
email chain that the Richard Meier would
have been on this panel at some point in
the various unfortunately wasn't it to
be here but if it my question actually
would have been to him and so maybe you
can help me did because it's okay when
you presented this Narada this morning
he employed addiction Meyer saying
something about the historical dialectic
and I have to say I was not used to
hearing such words and but this was
interesting to me this is where I did
think that something listed all the
confusion but whose of our system is not
and whatever all that stuff is also
interesting not for what it tells us
overtly but but someone is the spirit of
the previous discussion what is sort of
not said and and spoken not only so I
get out and I'm you want to ask in
effect the most straightforward
historians question which is really like
what happened I how work was it that we
began
this project began 1964 with a figure
like Richard Meier referring I suppose I
believe in all earnestness and sincerity
to something like the dialectic of
history you know maybe not to the home
cinemas and and and also to you know as
commercial bike as in the first panel
this morning especially relationship
with power he signed up with a power
pilot leaf and when the stems charts
were there in the morning and and then
you know and we're argued in the end so
clearly this is not just a part is there
is something in play here still in this
website the dynamo that you just
described already totally both of you
either in New York or LA and I don't
want to see if we can tweak it we could
really figure out maybe maybe that is
the job for those who've been recorded
but maybe we can help them by supplying
as much evidence so so for example very
very firm memory I really would like to
know what we were leading I mean it's
interesting to hear the tumbles story
that was very new management what we
this wasn't a waistline
reading a lot and you know Richard Meier
clearly was reading something too yes I
don't think we should that's great
Arthur come was a guru in dior who used
to feed Richard certain things forever
and if Richard was talking about the
marks of dialectic they came from Arthur
Arthur was it right down we used to read
Arthur phone I was in 64 when I came
back from Cambridge I I would be reading
lÃ©vi-strauss I would be brought Roland
Barbie reading structural I I was ready
to know Chomsky you know mystery
yeah 60 60 I'm talking about 64 because
when i came back to krishna that's what
i was was doing and you know Dario
doesn't come on the scene till much
later to those and those kinds of
figures i was reading thomas pynchon you
know i guess it was 74 gravity came
after i had read I mean he was a
classmate of my brother Zeke or not so
my brother knew him and said stepped
what happened I mean my reading history
whatever it's worth comes out of my
mother who was a complet philosophy
major Cornell when I was in Korea the
acura book came out all of the soft and
g fournier etc my brother you're sending
every week a little of both had nothing
to do
Korea so I read every act report from
London 90s when I was in Korea which was
the background of so there was nothing
there was nothing to read we used to and
Frampton's magazine we used to leave
perspective we used to read forum
architectural sense but there wasn't
that much I mean in Cambridge
for example I had us a tutorial
everything from tuesday / 29 students
from my college and i had to read what
they want to lose i read all the books
that had never read so I
done a lot of my own reading but I don't
think that's the issue I mean the issue
was there was a sensibility no accident
ken fraternity Bigler from from England
and common time that we were all
together there there was a kind of
energy at the kennel he did not from
France it from England and there was a
sensibility there that came over and
jury clearly understood that didn't want
it Scully certainly didn't want it and
that sensibility was nurtured by a lot
of people here under the umbrella for
one sense of case another school period
and fast learner you know we're here
umbrella is there such an umbrella today
no is it possible for such a good
financing no I think things are very
different and you know much more
fragmented and threat why are there
other places where young people gather
are there with young people no question
right I would have thought nearly value
with this for students is to say hey we
can do something like this we can have
you know get together and talk about
that when we did talk about I mean those
meetings at moma on 78 the critiques of
the house rule you saw comment review
seven and eight sterling was no easy I
mean there was a lot of critique that
were not and it ultimately involve
ideology minister and the fact that we
didn't cover for magazine that can was
supposed to edit is not for lack of
meeting and talking about it or wanting
to do it there was a lot of energy that
didn't want to do those things I want to
oh right i wanted to point to a book
that we were reading and I'm sure you do
too sandy Wilson came from England to
introduces to Christian or big shows the
meaning of architect enjoyably liked it
which we rather be thick and I actually
developed a lot of my teacher my PhD
against it I didn't know that yeah sorry
Matty Bevers average I wondered with the
two books that the eye I saw you last
yo now I i have here the transcript for
one of our meetings the first meeting
actually out at UCLA and i want to quote
you an Eisenman points points to get the
Yale / 10 axis and we talking about
whites and grays right the yield / to
append axis and the president / new york
/ ithaca axis now he tried he wants to
define the difference between whites and
grays well of the whites he says that
they can send with the capacity of a
form in space to affect the relationship
of an individual with society very noble
the graves are more concerned with
program colors and the set of immediate
problems waspy pipes up at that point
I'm just coming grade
all right yeah yeah I just have some
questions you know he's in this segment
just want to push a little bit more on
on innocence the intellectual dimensions
of this because I fight I say it's also
I think I speak to someone about friends
and colleagues here and who may be also
functioning that that meant give us a
great debt to his project in his many
dimensions institutionally
intellectually even if we in our own way
said you know resisted just as you did
so you know it's very very interesting
to try to in a sense explore the texture
of the resistances and the pressure so
okay so here you're talking about
meeting invested theory philosophy and
so on which has always in some sense
into one iteration or at one point or
another offered architecture art visual
discourse on some of these texts what
other what hope you know started moving
is that 10 what were you looking at
besides one another's work in other
words this is this donita cross by no
accents on the planet t like accidents
to make a rhyme minutes to do figure
ground drawings basically of this to
make even organizational charts as we
saw in signing up for this without piece
of the project could I conjure up to you
i'm sure each other different us a bit
of i'll tell you from my point of view
Gideon it pronounced the history was
both and that's where I started I mean
that's that's that happen just shortly
before I could winch architecture school
up now the that of course had to depend
on how to swing the other way and one of
the people who helped to swing endless
poor Rudolph thief visit in Europe for
the first time they came back broad old
extraordinary buildings which he'd seen
the leaked on of course always had some
historical building in the back of his
mind or in the front of his mind
whenever he whatever he designed I think
that God nuts and as a consequence we
were looking at Greg go oh I'm worried
opinion of course Venturi's complexity
in contradiction will look even harder
these ancient pillow over dis our
buildings because of how deceptive yet
in
and when we're talking if we're talking
64 Michael and I went over to see James
project Jim took us through the project
I remembered the famous incident with
Kent Frampton one of my favorite Kent
Frampton stories in here Michael and I
went to Europe to see Jim what we wanted
to see the nasal tver and I are so we
called can and we come on Tuesday said
not to come on Wednesday so we arrived
in Paris on when see and I thought maybe
we could have a nice French lunch but
Ken want a big relaunch they're still
still but you know who it was with
anyway it was a great lunch and so we
took him to lunch and then we said okay
cam already going see you I got a good
problem I can't let you guys in today
and I get stuck with us yeah no I mean
that you want to know what we were
looking at we were looking at gym strong
and the Maison de ver and other things
that were plenty of things to see in
Paris I mean to go to la comio squeeze
the maze on the road from me we're
looking at for boo basically we were
looking at some late french 19th century
Michael was interested in seeing but
after that you know we certainly weren't
looking at stuff in the United States
maybe we weren't taking trips to Oak
Park or troy that stuff was not at the
crazy that's crazy we're doing brothers
first led it to the nearest ATM the
letter inviting people to first case we
have three signatures on it your
signatures and Michael Graves talk for a
minute about Michael and case and how he
fit he was a participant through I think
much of it it's not here today we wish
you were but I think it would be welcome
to hear about my participation
yes I just got done eulogy for Michael I
if you need to I don't think Michael I
said in this talk I don't think Michael
was at work postmodernist I think what
he did when he was on after the nasara
hanselman Schneiderman which were three
great projects he had an enormous talent
suddenly he felt the need to shift it
wasn't due to venturi and complexity it
was some other energy and Fargo Moorhead
was an amazing project and Portlandia
was you know a different project there
were some good early Michael shift
projects that were pretty I mean I had
one of my students just yesterday did an
analysis of fargo-moorhead I never
realized that that drawing was not rely
there were three different levels in
that so that the side elevation was
tripartite as well as
just stunning project I think Michael
was an original what he tried to do in
his way as I said it at the the eulogy
was heroic he had a heroic spirit I
think what happened to Michael and it
happens to a lot of people he hit the
ceiling in 1980 he was top dog top of
the world venice biennale etc and any
hit the Whitney in New York and the
Whitney he wanted very much he tried
three times together Whitney was it
really the first 100 second for
brilliant projects they would get big
projects which I maker a very
interesting formal device that he used
and when he lost the Whitney he lost
some of that what you would call
indigenous Midwestern spear
he was the center on his high school
football team by all of us probably wish
we would have been a center on the high
school football team but none of this
work Mike he was anyway I think Michael
was an amazing character and he had a
very tragic and he was very bitter I
think at the end about perhaps the way
he had chosen to go because he left as
it were that move and that moment he was
in and I think Michaels history is going
to be a very complex history and you
know i was asking people who who is the
most likely to me most likely ball and
fifty years where will rule of the
employer Michael be and I think that's a
really interesting question because they
both had
so I mean I i was at those meetings and
was it to me I don't know remember what
if our case is Michael Michaels part of
the original case he was part of what
this person called Eisenman graves right
I was careful Michael he was there for
me you were yeah I met you both together
doesn't work he did all the talking I
that's what's really true after high man
Michael started to be a talkie I did all
the presentations he you know did all
that woman is also development and Stan
I was last time the word environment
when we use environment now I think it
now we've inserted it connotes what
social scientists do move about with the
environment and it actually for us at
least for my students it means non
designed it means even an tight side and
I think it meant something very very
different the way doctrine was using it
and the fact that case is it is
to complete the environment does he know
where when it was first used and how and
where it comes from and why it was
chosen in its case but it seems it seems
almost anti architectural that seems
what you study the environment because
you don't want to study intentional
architecture Michael I can tell you this
that the Institute for architecture and
urban studies took its name did say
environments in urban studies could care
less about understudies the only way we
would have been supported by any I was
to have our studies in the title and I
think somehow that energy must have been
in the nomination of case I don't know
what I have that I think that Beverly
has certain responsibilities to this
because that certain thing where I did
who is hidden Donlon can you support me
in this or that wrong oh god well i
think does i think over to those stand
just having a adoptive that and still
after that but the interpretations that
is against design it is not the way
vertices yeah what Birkin sees that the
environment as a source for energies for
thinking about a very complex but all
right oh he's a reason the right over
okay she made book I actually I have
been not active teaching at Berkeley
City smartly arrived so she may have
more up-to-date version that was not it
was not seen as as a hospital
environment but the scene as that which
we are in the midst of and must pay
attention to and draw energy becomes a
school about it I studies and it gives
yourself into division in David's life
and at some point I cover Wendy changes
some practice to lot these clear that
environments being used at that time you
know this whole problem of optics are
given I think so i think the environment
it was pretty dismal pretending to the
gym
we flipped it mostly them in terms of
the science it comes to my son when this
anxiety of scientific societies it is
honestly the project my group and and
change in with the time yes but again I
think that's not quite what the
motivation was back oh I'm sure that
that there's any name university has of
the germination issue to it but I really
very much believe that that might have
had some value as a gathering financial
resources as well that it was really
environmentally sign talked about not
permit oil here I'm nothin Reverend
engineering and yeah since you mentioned
well in days I can't resist thomas royds
intolerant ear when i was first with MIT
he came because they were doing all this
there were so offended about informing
education and he came around we've been
all but off to lunch and then he started
holding forth and one of the things he
said a long way her early on was no the
problem of architects our special
education is that architects who never
think about education except in terms of
how they are very educated it's always
thinking back to updated and then he
went on
then he went on for another 15 minutes
on various subjects who came back into
what we must do is educate people to
take on any kind of problem that comes
along
so don't get up okay five minutes
