you
claiming this territories to be part of
his rifle team or inheritance in 1526
before established himself in delhi and
agra after the Battle of pajmhi path and
this is what they usually considered the
beginning so we're dealing here with a
dynasty that was Sunni Muslim Central
Asian also talked among go and then
after marriages with local herbs da
Christine also partially Indian that was
willing a majority of a population was
mostly Hindu but there were also joins
Zoroastrians and some Jews and
Christians it was under the reign of the
third Mughal ruler and for Akbar bubbles
grandson that the Empire became a major
power in the region and human its wealth
relative stability economic ties and
religious and cultural atmosphere
attracted numerous learning people
artists and professionals of also see it
leaves around 1600 Iranians Central
Asians Turks Indians from the Deccan
Hindu Rajas from Gujarat rajasthan van
Gaal for to give Jesuits in European
traders were among those gathered at the
North Indian Court of Lockhart one of
the richest and most cosmopolitan port
of the time it also attracted poets
painters calligraphers and musicians
seeking prestige
aquas workshops were among the largest
known at the time employ more than 100
artists they produce numerous
illustrated manuscript of different
kinds as well as single page page page
paintings illustrated manuscript from
1580 homework it is innovative features
with respect to their urban landscape
background and just to show you an
example what was happening before the
1580s and afterward they ordered upset
our eyes and see a different that I'm
talking about so on the left you have a
page from the enviros to haley and if
you focus on the upper part of the
composition and compared to this one you
will see really major differences in
terms of the intricate working of the
background 1 is less intricate and the
different in details and also perception
of the space and distance between these
two images is really striking
what prompted the creation of cityscape
painting in the Mughal realm and what is
precisely represented in these vignettes
I look at the urban scenes from a new
perspective using google topographical
writing descriptions of cities and
architecture in order to understand the
meaning of this micro architecture
landscape I argue that these
metropolitan vignettes should be viewed
as reflecting the Mughal sense of
ownership and pride in the land of
Hindustan their complete establishment
in the subcontinent and their
socio-economic success from the end of
the 16th and early seventeenth centuries
grappling with a relationship between
categories of analysis i divided the
Indian urban things into two main types
one in which the architecture is part of
a narrative and another that is
superfluous or another specific site is
linked directly to the moment depicted
in the soil today I shall focus on the
latter group where the architecture is
not text dependent in these many urban
topographies we find the following
elements clustered together forming some
sort of event well-polished
constellation and I'm showing you that
i'm going to show these images these are
the actual building strong interior the
block mark in order to establish their
conceptual modulation in translation as
well as to assert vernacular character
so we have buildings
which is the hallmark of global
architecture some buildings are
completely white depicted in white and
perhaps are presenting marble or
whitewash and also these kind of these
types of buildings also represent
usually Hindu shrines or temples and you
can see the women frustrating we have
city walls with turrets and it's
interesting to look at the patterns of
the walls here also the turrets on the
side and also the main gate the main
entrance gate into these complexes that
also appear in these small cities the
use of chhatri as an open pavilion or
kiosks and i'm looking at into these
kind of images in here here and here and
also if you look at another comparison
the kind of angular symmetry that the
artist captured in those ministrations
is very interesting these are the
architecture and we also have
architecture with pointed domes with
finials and this is an easy comparison
and this is an interesting type of
building that we have the displays at
freedom structure perhaps alluding to a
mosque you can see here here here
we also have buildings with hormones
and also we have richly ornamented
carved peers columns and tower like
structures and this is a very
interesting detail with this motif here
visa visa to shapes of justine particle
secret and then power like structure the
colossal when they conclude by saying
that when examining images of the mughal
microarchitecture more closely two
things become clearer one the majority
of them the Indian artist for the
majority of them Indian artists utilized
vocabulary that is based on local Mughal
architecture many of the elements can be
found in royal buildings and complexes
such as a farce fatehpur sikri most of
the monuments and the second one is the
growth of the monuments represent
illusory architectural elements that
pretend to belong to removal physical
reality the emphasis in the mobile
paintings is not only on the
architecture but also only teammates
walled cities in our historical
narrative the change in lens paper
cityscape depictions in India has been
attributed to the meaning of local
painters with European art up until now
scholars have explained the existence of
these receding backgrounds with micro
architecture in relations Renaissance
painting especially netherlandish art
and illustrated book of hours he's got
the fear that i'm going to show you now
the pier in a lot of articles in
scholarly works the support DC this is a
kind of standard comparison so usually
you have is it taken from a full page
for presentation and but what you get in
the material if the scholarly
publications are these kind of crop
images that perhaps reinforce in order
to reinforce the argument of some kind
of the relationship between these two
and scholars were talking about the
composition and the similarity between
the structures and the trees and the
landscape between these kind of images
many of the links or perceived
replications between eastern and western
materials and art historians have
recognized or based on visual
comparisons in an effort to identify
European originals that most probably
inspired Google patrons of artists to
produce works of art like this moreover
scholars tend to see these depicted
structures and essentially European and
suggest a European origin for the mobile
landscape but I think that they're not
seeing the forest for the trees one
specific example that has been argued to
make a great impact on google art is the
polyglot bible this Bible was printed in
Africa by Christopher pumpkin in 15
the first Jesuit mission brought it to
emperor Akbar sport in 1580 and of
course this invention in Google sources
but it is mentioned by the chess or
Susan strong for example plane to the
first title page of volume 1 of the
photo op Bible which depicts a harbor
landscape in the background have
inspired the inclusion of Portuguese
ships sailing the rocky landscape
studded with buildings in the Victorian
Albert higher gonchar picture and just
explain to you the context this is a
page from a manuscript that is dealing
with the life of Hari Krishna so it's a
Hindu texts that was translated into
portion at the court and what's
Illustrated and just to compare these
two so there are you that this is coming
from what we see here and if you start
looking at the details people look more
closely we may notice a visually on a
certain level may both show shifts water
diagonal a kill range with micro
architecture but there is no mistaking
one for the other and you can see if the
Mughal very specifically the mosque type
perhaps the shrine
one here and the different trees that
are depicted so perhaps the connection
is more to the ships but even if you
look at the ship's they are very
different from one another and so this
will really work and I think that there
is even less connection with respect to
the terrain and architecture other
scholars like the phenomenon of
miniature urban landscape tune Atlantis
paintings as well as two images in the
christian book of hours they refer more
specifically to the Canon Derek
representations of the labors of the
month which is a well-known iconographic
cycle in European visual tradition based
on that they describe this Indian urban
landscapes as a manager of the European
visual tradition of the European and
Google representation but I argued that
and they argue that the art of the
Google artists borrow this
microarchitecture tradition from similar
representations in the Christian prayer
book so they're thinking about they
mentioned the bridge here and the bridge
here the kind of meandering competition
that we can see here the use of water as
well as here and the people with the
vegetation
but also another thing that is important
to remember about this book of hours and
in several cases the this landscape and
these architectures are very specific
and connected to a very specific locale
into the estate of the patron in many
times and this is really not what is
happening here we cannot locate that
interest pacific place so that's a great
difference between these two this
approach of comparing the european and
mughal representations we help us
imagine what kind of european materials
circulated at the mughal workshops since
we have very little concrete physical
and textual evidence of the kind of
Renaissance images that arrived at or
produced by europeans in india but here
were also getting to the heart of the
problem they were sending reviewer
centric perspective which characterized
scholarly work on mobile art and to hide
this approach that's the belief that the
Renaissance artist was perceived to be
faster and a genius and happy the Mughal
painter compete with such high
intellectual creations an issue is the
assumption that Google artists lacked
originality understanding and
consciousness when they copied or
imitated European art
however the opposite is true indian
artists and patrons were not interested
in converting to Christianity and the
Jesuits constantly telus or in
replicating Renaissance art nor were
they smitten with European culture their
sense of the global was related to their
multifaceted imperial identity expressed
through conscious expansion of religious
and socio-cultural horizons I view the
connection between the Indian plat
panoramas and the European material as
more nuanced interlace it is difficult
to see a one-to-one copy or
straightforward systematic relationship
between the European and the Mogul
paintings and I would like to bring
another perspective to the discussion
one that considers over writings about
sitting and to examine the micro
architectural vistas in light of these
texts I also just want to clarify that
I'm not denying the relationship to
European art rather I would like to
create a shift in the perspective and
interpretation of east-west encounters
giving agency to move up patrons and
artists this is a story not only about
the diffusion and incorporation of
European imagery but also about the
negotiation of political hierarchy
religious order philosophical and
artistic choices
of the simple example that we have seen
it appears that these vignettes
construct some sort of a typology of an
imagined mobile metropolitan ism in
order to understand these codes eqs
displays of constructed urbanism I
believe that we need to turn to mobile
sources and use them as a framework of
discussions of Entercom and commentaries
on places an emperor akbar's request the
historian Amita Parvati composed a
healthy clean seven points in 1594 a
work that celebrates the regions of the
world it introduces each major city for
the description of its unique
architectural structures when the author
describes Delhi which lies in the third
about a fit about the capital of Pujara
Rosie states that at canaccord the CD is
exceptionally the craftsmanship and
elegance of its architecture and
buildings and its marketplace of a guard
in contrast to those of other Indian
cities is extremely vast the need for
perfectly decorated shops of two or
three stories have been constructed
based on Google sources a city in India
would oftentimes include walls Yates
green areas towers and noticeable
monuments such as mosques shrines
palaces etc and if you look at mean kind
of depictions you see exactly the same
kind of emphasize and ideas and here's
what ever fathom the chief historian
enclosed confident Akbar has to say
about opera opera is a large city and
possesses a healthy climate the river
Yamuna flows through it and on either
our delightful villas and pleasant
stretches of meadow it is filled with
people from all countries and it is the
Emporium of the traffic of the world His
Majesty Akbar has built a fort of
redstone of the the like of which
travellers have never reported it
contains more than 500 buildings of Lisa
me after the beautiful designs of
Bengali Gujarati which mastery
sculptures and argit's of form and
fashion as architectural models and
Eastern gay there are two elephants of
stone with the writers graven with our
motto is keen on describing the cultural
a fluorescence of the Empire through
prominent display of its architectural
magnificent he is well aware of the
sophistication with which the buildings
were designed and he's eager to comment
on the impact they have on international
audiences travelers as well as local
petitioners the movement of people and
the diversity of the population are also
important paradigms in the descriptions
of City and it is clearly reflected in
these mini urban vignettes as part of
the technology of who will metropolitan
isms we made out in series travelers
coming and going religious figures
aesthetics foreigners people playing
working the land and you see all of that
here for example we have a NOC yogi
walking here people are coming and going
someone perhaps playing and be someone
working the land the different classes
of society where the different
activities
in addition to descriptions of buildings
and monuments an integral part of mobile
account of cities is its abundance and
quality of fruit drains and flowers for
example of a puzzle says about a lava
that it has an i quote a stone port that
was there was risk that was completed
recently as well as many handsome
edifice with a certain shrine that the
he disregarded the king of shrines he
further states that a lava climate is
healthy it produces a variety of fruits
flowers and gardener when he talks a lot
about the sense that comes from these
herbs and they open over ties an
abundant supply of melons and grapes
also very important in that these ideas
and descriptions of the city as organism
resonate in the painting portraying a
world cluster of buildings agricultural
activities lush vegetation along with
characters like a naughty Yogi and other
travelers well the Ultima graphical
works flourished under the new bolts are
two story and suggested that the Indian
artists were inspired by and adopted the
European concept of the so-called left
Lanza the world land speed and like the
European counter
created not individual but European
entities however the sum total of the
mobile examples both literary and visual
might convey the complexity of these
cultural context and the Google's
intricate negotiation of localism and
cosmopolitanism in these works of art
black twice when thinking about it
suggests the parallels between european
and indian artistic creations the
context of the mughal urban landscape is
very different from the european ones
the indian paintings appear in
illustrated historical texts such as the
before amended economy literature prose
and poetry such as the hands of these on
me the thumbs-up Bobby worked why study
tables of dunbar soheila can give you a
long long list here they do not form
part of religious books like The Book of
Hours Christian oil paintings for
devotional friends and they are not
intended to be used in that way I argue
that the Indian video urban topographies
portraying physical settings that are
linked to the Mughal built world the
reconfiguration of organ motifs into
Indian idioms altered their former
Christian European context and therefore
reflects Mughal territorial geography
identity and their sense of pride and
ownership towards of Hindustan
another explanation that has been
offered regarding the appearance of we
need your architecture in Google
painting is linked to the inquisitorial
personalities of Google emperors and
their interest in the environment and
the natural world the Mughals writers
and brewers have been associated with
paying much attention to their
surroundings and geography scholars have
folk often fall back on the world's
descriptions of cities flowers and
animals in his photo biographical
memoirs the pub ornament if the impulse
behind the pictures of land animals and
buildings looking at Google geographical
writings from a historical perspective
it is worth understanding that their
interest in surveys of places florin
founder is concurrent with traditional
writing of histories in the Muslim spear
this can be seen in rashida jones drama
atari which include the entire volume
dedicated to geography or in honda
meters history happy to see our that
contains geographical descriptions of
the layout of the land climate cities
important monuments vegetation and
people's the inclusion of such elements
in the traditional part of historical
writing and as could be expected these
literary preferences were further
reflected in visual triples the work of
the famous demonoid are Dispenza for
from the end of the 15th century has
been characterized with naturalism
including the depictions of everyday
activities and emphasizing the diversity
of figures and populate that calculate
these competitions as known as
roxboro all things considered creating
the Mughal historian topographical and
visual interest in similar ideas their
preferences for the fictions of cities
monuments and the land are not so
peculiar at the same time praising
India's architecture urban centers and
nature has not always been the norm for
the Mughals in earlier times before who
like to complain about everything in the
subcontinent wrote in his memoirs that
Hindustan is a place of little charm
there is no people no critical social
intercourse no poetic talent or
understanding no etiquette no ability
for mental illness art and craft have no
harmony or symmetry however a feeling of
belonging and identity have shifted
dramatically with Akbar and the poetry
that was commissioned by the Emperor at
the mobile mobility was in praise of
India salil Sharma argues that under a
car engineer court poets were
commissioned to write topographical
literature praising the new monuments
and i quote translating the vision of a
new building or city into the discursive
realm of poetry and in the persian
literature authors celebrated
architectural achievements of a
particular city and praised cities as
thriving centers of power commerce and
culture unlike their Iranian
counterparts mobile writers were more
intent on
sizing the multicultural fabric of their
societies I just wanted to pay attention
that also Europeans would appear here
Muhammad Ali who was another historian
writing under octoparse period describes
the capital city of Agra s and I caught
a flourishing learn study that offers
abundant of security for all inhabitants
under the expense of heaven the city
includes numerous monument gardens ships
flowing up and down the river and offer
further remarks that the multitude of
foreigners from all sorts of nations
from the corners of the four sides of
the world have gathered for trade and
fulfillment of necessities in such a
country that the dollar califo of Agra
has become all of India the descriptions
of prosperous governments and public
spaces in the capital city enhance our
notion of abundance and diversity but
only with respect to offer himself but
also regarding the Empire and the move
the Mughal world as a whole emphasizing
India's position as a global
international center from the important
part of the motor units vision of
themselves and their domain these
notions are further reflected in
paintings and of course you can identify
the different monuments with it window
and the different kind of style of
painting perhaps of architecture perhaps
also including some European style goes
beyond the encyclopedic interest in
their domains these images and writings
are representations of mughal dominance
unlike tu amor who disliked the idea
this is google territorial identity that
is also reflected in historical writing
i would like to argue that they hide
these territorial interests lies across
religio-political ideology which
crystallizes in the 1580s 1590s the
profits the representations of different
buildings in the city scale linked to
hindu temples mosques and perhaps
european-style structures represent the
diverse population and groups under
google moon at such the timing of the
appearance of these depictions
corresponds to the formation and
establishment of at marks new policy of
tolerance for Haku this change in social
order governance and ideology is to my
mind at the core of Mughal visions of
India and these new ideas were expressed
in writing and in pain beginning in the
1580s after adopted a policy called saw
a code which is peace for all or
universal peace which was an approach of
inclusion for the local non Muslim
population according to Sora core
proposition equals a different page were
free to practice their own religions
some became part of our permeability and
several were allowed to partake in the
political administrative and cultural
life with the Empire Akbar made policy
changes that were rooted in the idea of
creating balance and harmony among the
different
communities within his empire to that
end he developed a more equalized system
of government abolishing various taxes
among Muslims and opening both his
administration an army to Hindus and
other non Muslims and why would he need
to do such thing as to begin with after
with over a population that was mostly
Hindu equal who were considered infidels
afternoon in the eyes of Islam and how
could he be considered a Muslim King if
his ruling a majority of calculation
that is capital and how could the
Emperor establish his authority and his
smoking in this multi-confessional
multilingual Empire also because because
according to the strict Sharia law
Islamic law into those who come under
Muslim rule face too difficult options
either convert to Islam and there were
instances of course conversion not too
many in the Mughal Empire earlier on in
operas rain or be faced with the
consequences of poem or of jihad by
choosing the path of cercla core Akbar
goes against the traditional will among
the religious authorities he recognized
that if his empire was to succeed he had
to duck to he had to devise a different
religion political approach the Sharia
his notion was to create a non-sectarian
and open-ended cultural politics with
the endeavor of balancing the
conflicting claims of different
communities muzaffer alam argues that so
he was possible in over india not only
because of adverse ideas but also
because of the tradition of that
for communities of different beliefs and
social practices and learn to live
together their trash is not withstanding
since Mughal India was a complex place
we must understand at bars and grace of
silicon not only in spiritual terms but
also as part of the transformation of
his ability to include diverse Orthodox
Muslim communities and other groups such
as Shiite Iranian Bradford fingers we
can start comprehending how these ideas
may explain the appearance of praises of
the cosmopolitan urban centers and
powertrain paintings at the same time
and if you see again we're looking at
another servic bigger right and the
different kind of buildings and this
kind of cosmopolitan atmosphere of the
city and the balance and harmony that is
created based on them and I think that
these kind of diverse the diversity
vacation of these representations are
specifically connected through the
circuit court in a letter to the safavid
king of Iran Chavez at Burger King's
must specify the hearts of people of all
sects in accordance with the principle
of equal as the Divine Mercy attaches
itself to every form of free it must be
borne in mind that divine graciousness
and mercy are open to all creeps and one
should exert oneself to the utmost to
bring oneself into the garden of story
cold as it is only proper that kings who
are the shadows of God should not give
up on this practice and it was at the
design
shadow kings or the shadows of God and
before thinking about these kind of
harmony balance cosmopolitanism again
you can see the European people that are
coming and going the movement of people
and the balance between nature and
architecture at first portrayal of so he
cool is very similar to descriptions of
an ideal society he retired he as
formulated by the medieval philosopher
and scientist nasir al-din to see and
his composition are lucky not to and
here i would like to add another tier to
the multi-layered complexity and his
customers notions of bright governments
that were related to a lucky literature
and the people of the virtuous in magic
park bars policy and the writing of his
official historian and close confident
our puzzle can be directly linked to the
work of the medieval philosophy we also
foreign scientists conclusive work the
Atacama theory was composed in Persian
in the 13th century and it is a
theoretical idealistic work on ethics
economics and politics it's the
typically outlines the moral behaviors
of the individual as well as the more
and the just organization of the society
the city and the state that it also has
a cosmic level not to be linked to the
teachings of the pre-islamic Persian
Greek crosswords and Persians
intertwined with discussions and
interpretation
vs and in generally scholars catechol
categorize event belonging to the mirror
for Prince's genre hurry Akbar strain of
juices text had become part of the
curriculum of the court it was widely
circulated and there is a lavishly
Illustrated copy that belonged to akbar
blood suckers library that had 17
paintings and i'm just showing off this
painting because this is part of the
lucky got a tremendous grip it's a very
famous painting in mobile heart and i
could not pass the opportunity to show
them but this is part of the man is part
of part of one of the manuscripts that
were circulating at the port other of
blacky works by human authors were also
known as the vocal cords such as the
Kakuma you me and her other text similar
text according to all to see and
reiterated by a ball puzzle the ultimate
ruler is the philosopher king and his
governance is based on Justice and
Justice meant to ensure the immediately
effective authority of the king well
being of the citizens or subjects and
prosperity of the country therefore
justice is defined as a quote social
harmony a coordinated balance of the
conflicting claims of diverse interest
groups which could well belong to more
than one religion in an ideal state
cooperation is a keyword and the rights
of the subject are not related to their
religion Adduci describes the ideal city
which he calls the virtual city Medina
medela as a combination of people whose
aspirations are fixed on the acquisition
of goods and their Google of eagles they
appeared the different community and
doctrine but and I quote the people of
the virtual City all by diversify
throughout the world are in reality
agreed for their hearts are upright one
towards another and they are adorned
with love for each other this is very
similar to the Google description of
Sony cool and again they're worth
talking about the establishment of
authority not through power but through
love and affection in the virtual City
and I quote there will be no prejudice
or sir or concert concentration among
them as long as they follow the
leadership of the just cool I believe
that the micro architecture and
landscape in the background of these
paintings dating from the 1590s
represent these are yields of diversity
social order and columns which are made
to be is policy so when I look at these
and representations the harmony between
the nature and the built world the
various people the different kind of
monuments that are related to all the
different relations for me this is a
reflection of the virtual city and the
Sochi cool ideas that Akbar has been in
the portrait
in prosperous times the city was the
location of patronage networks and a
cosmopolitan center of cultural life
right the mughals feelings towards his
English not reflect original enthusiasm
that appears to be deeply intertwined
with a mughal celebration of their own
cosmopolitanism colloquialism the two
not being seen as mutually mutually
exclusive by the end of the 17th century
Korean affair was the faith it was
Mughal dominance that had allowed him to
start to thrive to the extent of
becoming the new center of the early
modern world or at least of the Persian
each realm a transformation in which the
dynasty took no small tribe this
amalgamation of local and universal
ideal and concrete mix with success and
pride of the mold elite is manifested in
the micro architecture representations
by making these transformations and by
this term i mean the translation and
reconfiguration of artistic concepts
from one context to another the artists
innovatively combined images and to
avoid consuming illusory architectural
elements to appears if belonging to a
physical reality with the buildings and
gardens of the city the successful and
intricate combination of localism and
rocky cosmopolitanism promoted by the
movement seems to have constituted the
ultimate standard of the dynasty
cultural pluralism as a developed from
the late 16th century onwards
have you noticed the difference of
paintings have you noticed that the
difference of painting technique in the
in this kind of micro what painting
technique in the same miniature compared
to the lower main areas because they
seem to be all like especially the
landscape seems to be done with the
relation of color which we don't always
see in that at least the Persian world
that it seems to the use of the
landscape and the color technique in the
application of bomb in the miniature
seems to have come from perhaps a
European source I haven't looked at it
yet because for me color is connected to
the two perspective and the way they are
employing perspective manipulating
perspective and that is the second part
of the chapter that I haven't gotten
just a comparison with the Ottomans
which was happening more than earlier in
the starting from the early 16th century
not as detailed enough as these type of
cityscapes but little vignettes of in
the background with a few people
sometimes more again with that type of
landscape use comes this type of color
usage which is a different use compared
to the Persian
tell me about the bluish yeah that is
definitely connected to the another
language tradition that's something that
I see but if you're looking at the part
below it yeah no I mean the but a really
really top form yet they're kind of
receiving atmospheric for spend eternity
with a collar hey thank you I really
appreciate you've talked in this effort
to talk in a more detailed and sustained
way of with the lions gate to the
backgrounds to the narratives which tend
to attract more attention than revising
the oldest anabaena quite slightly
belated we are historically but that
reflects maybe the Mughal painting field
more than anything else putting the
European material to one side is the
prime mover and what happens and the
last but I'm sort of thinking you know
you pretend a very convincing case for
how it is that the landscape reflects
local topography conditions and also
morphological aspects of Mughal
architecture in this late dr. bari kuril
John Geary period and yet I can't think
of a single instance well maybe one or
two in the arts of the book where the
representation of landscape does
anything other than show a real world
that is available and that has the end X
of the local reflective enna so that
would need to be I think developed in a
a stronger way and then the other aspect
which is to do with landscape with these
it may just be our own somewhat
traumatic experience the effects of
urbanism on landscape and the management
of landscape because they seem to be
such wonderful lovely places that we
don't like to learn man but it also the
idea you know the taking something like
the work of ethics either the nursery
and ethic
you could think of the Aqua a mutiny is
the latest the latest emirate version
and thinking about modeling an economy
in the rulers rule with respect to
governing a landscape you would think
that this would also be just completely
normal and acceptable understanding of
the representation of landscaping Google
paintin so again how do you make that
causal relationship stronger and then a
third question would be you know what
are the temporal implications of these
represented the temporal implications of
these representations of Lionsgate
because the other you have a
groundedness and a locality and maybe a
cosmopolitanism showing through the
landscape in the architecture and yet in
every instance these are almost never
end since these are stores that are
historically located or their works of
poetry that our method logical and we're
never to be understood as factual I hope
they were clear and i think that the
difference that you see between what i
showed with the unwary suhaimi for
example image and what you see here is
just very good for me if I day and night
because because one is really almost
American and there is very little
interest in that is he also in in the
early room world paintings and not
necessarily given in illustrated
manuscript but in the garden party for
exam
painting there is no interest in this
kind of urban filled urban world and not
even specific interest in depicting the
body trees and very special species that
are connected to India there is a
landscape it's a little bit more
abstract I would think it's a little bit
more imaginative in terms of identifying
specific flowers and categories of
plants and rocks that are connected to
the place and what we see here so I
think that there is kind of a more focus
and interest in the specific training
landscape opinion that has not been so I
do see a change look at the house on of
it you don't see the same kind of
interest and and appearance of India in
the background as you see here the
second one talks about the of
theory and how it is more connected into
what we see here right so that there is
a shift in policy acabar is not as not
only thing there is this kind of image
of art bar in general literature but
also you some scholarly literature that
like the refrain as this very nice man
who like to hug everyone and everybody
was really interested in Hinduism and
Chinese and all kinds of things but
maybe he was but there is also very
practical aspect of it and he
which he had to learn this practical
aspects throughout his reign and he had
to come to terms to realize that if he
wants this thing to work he needs to
make a change and then how does he make
these changes without alienating the
Muslim population within by creating
this kind of inclusion and the text that
is constantly quoted by Abu Faisal in
the Akbar anime and it's just stunning
once you start reading the aflac in
Assyrian you go back to the airport i
may just unbelievable to see those
parallels and there is also a big
article my mother for a long about that
this is this is almost like copy and
paste from the hockey mystery' and so I
think there is a very conscious decision
to go by these kind of ideas and and
then they also come into into the
paintings so it's not just that kind of
and I see that you're not coming know
yet how do I know that because with the
timing by the time that he starts with
this Oracle policy that is based on the
on a theory a few years later this is
what you find in paintings you don't see
it beforehand and this is exactly false
but at the same time with the power tree
and other writings that are dealing with
the cities and the in-between so the
timing of that tells me that something
has changed and this is connected to the
change in policy otherwise you're right
yes it could be anything but that this
comes in a very specific an really draw
a line in mobile painting and say this
before this is after so for me this is
an indication that it is connected I
don't remember the third question little
talk about delayed okay thank you maybe
what you say is very it makes sense but
for someone who wants to doubt it I
think maybe you can introduce some
comparisons that would show how
different this is so for example I was
thinking the Ottomans also have the same
text and they developed a much more
realistic I'll topographic painting much
earlier where you can actually identify
certain cities and sites where is this
although individual buildings can be
identified as Mughal they are really
idealized landscapes so I think these
kinds of comparisons also maybe with
painting in the data where they might
have again localism it's school go I
mean one put even when I make these
comparisons not going to be very easy to
pinpoint it with Lincoln sadies were
like parallel things happening i
completely understand the desire and
there is indeed because of the
idealization a sense of peacefulness
puto maybe that could be something to be
emphasized the reason Sonny need you to
fully peaceful about it that's that's a
very good point so you think that if I
compared to the Ottomans of the south of
it at the same time I think also be
within India and also to make more like
a technical thing is I'm saying to show
earlier google in
really means the audience that this is
really happening exactly this time which
I'm sure thank you hi thanks for your
cuff and I really really enjoy your
effort to shift sort of shift the agency
away from Europeans as the instigators
of all the all the artistic changes at
the mobile court um but since you have
you seem to have a very sort of precise
emphasis on timing like when when this
philosophy becomes prominent at at Mars
court and sort of when it shows up in
painting and because of that what I kept
wondering about was the dates because a
lot of a lot of the dates of the
paintings you're showing or sort of late
1590s or Sen 1600 and Prince Salim
rebels in 1599 and there's a lot of
paintings that are being made at his
independent atelier and I wondered how
you were going to engage with that
because the microarchitecture remains
remains a theme throughout the home Gary
period as well that's a Gary out in the
silly mom we don't see the same thing
it's not there I actually looked at some
I was trying to find more images and I
was going again through the paintings
from the Saudi mom woman you don't see
the same landscape you do see the
individual figures of the Yogi's at
tetra that you see but not things like
that and it's also interesting to see
that at the beginning of his reign he
does if we can connect these manuscripts
to his
the years that he was in rebellion then
there is at the beginning there is a
continuation but also the days of some
of these manuscripts are so flaky that
it meant a problem that I have been for
example there is one manuscript that is
dating to 1604 not based on akkalla
phone and all not based on out on any
inscription so I don't know we decided
on this service 1604 eight which is
important because it's 1605 I for nice
so that's that's a thing and just
following up on you mention aleem album
I also wondered slim album is an album
and also most of your examples are from
manuscripts and if you have an in a
script also do not the ones anarchic
that are directly can be linked to kiss
me after the fun in a lab at the time
they do not show the same thing which is
interesting thanks very much we can
follow up on Robyn's question about
these two questions come to mind one the
historical manuscripts I'm curious as to
what you would say about the odd for
nama times a teens and whether you
guess with the specificity of place of
seeing the more complex the second piece
of it is that this is a time when Akbar
has shifted landscape general to
urbanism and organization urban
patronage he's the one who makes that
 curious to know that shift is
relevant for the frequency with which we
see cities to pected and backgrounds
even as compared with later shot Johnny
baby where you can have an agrarian
scene no city at all right I didn't
think about the last one that hits
shifting into more architectural paper
that fun that could be really
interesting in terms of the historical
manuscripts it's interesting because you
see the Battle of this and this folder
this in this place
more individualized characters of these
depictions but but they still fall into
these they still kind of give a generic
oftentimes of generic and a portrayal of
a fort or another place that's something
that I need to look more into but I on
purpose did not want to go into the
historic Main Street because sometimes
it's very easy to just fall into that
idea that they are trying to portray in
actual location and sometimes I do do
that but John here's Barry they do much
more for example
that actually shows in the background
the tomb of Akbar Humber and that Robert
skeleton identified and that event took
place exactly in that area and the tube
is shown so you do see a very specific
representation of actual architecture
that we can identify time you in terms
of the landscape in historical
manuscripts oh I'm on purpose avoiding
that and pretending that it does not
exist at the moment but I probably
should look into that again thank you
related to the third question um what
the kind of rationale for including me
in these paintings are and you didn't
really give the feeling you have a sort
of propaganda in mind but the other
explanation is possibly seeping through
or it's reflective of why why include
these at all why not just have a
separate manuscript of maternity and to
see where they represented ideal tease
the eff separate language groups of
Nazareth into see and there are fit
there are all kinds of things
differences that are represented there
and I think Marissa family just gave a
talk about it in
see what she said about that but I think
I don't see this as propaganda remember
these things are not widely circulated
right if it were very close and very
exclusive audience right so I see them
as a more reflective the policies and
not as a public at all right that's
something that people are talking about
at the court and in the workshops and
it's something that kind of disseminates
from from the administration if you want
in the bureaucracy in two different
tears in the indian empire right and
that's how these kind of ideas circulate
it's not a I don't see there's a one to
one in which case then you're the
European argument does still work very
well but an artistic model for putting
these cities there it's with but how do
they really do not look like the their
existence at all then you have to
convince me with
you mentioned that the white ones
usually the white buildings represent
new things or with a specific shape then
they have they have a temple yeah but
one thing I notice in the business case
is that in at least in part to it you
would expect more red and they have a
lot of white actually which is like
before the invention of the addition of
the white marble and so on so in a way
even the colors seem not very
naturalistic in a way that they are
again it ties into the they are not
wanting if they had wanted today would
have resented actual show so that would
tie in the more metaphorical and I think
I'm trying to represent some kind of a
mixture but also we have to also
remember that they think about it also
as a composition to the rules of visual
aspect that we have to take into account
but definitely yes service it's not it's
not a specific place and it's not a real
thing that we can say oh this is it
just following on it I'm glad you
mentioned the compositional part because
one thing that struck me is that there
be a lot of potential to talk about the
representation of city in compositional
terms I haven't seen folks do that I
think you have made a good case by
picking out elements of architecture and
even if we take the point you made
earlier about the various angular
formations within these complexes some
detail in with you some attention
pleased with how things hold together
through that form up a cityscape I
haven't done that that's a that's a huge
project that I'm also not going to do
right now for another project go fair
enough
