and real pleasure to be a great pleasure
being introducing our speaker Stefania
Immokalee from the World Bank will be
having as I say a bit about some of the
future lectures just by way of
introduction three weeks hence our
speaker will be David fair trial Ruggles
from the University of Illinois at
urbana-champaign she'll be talking about
the landscape and water systems of
Grenada and then following that our
postdocs will be giving their talks and
they'll conclude with the talks taught
by architect from Delhi Pankaj Gupta
this research and practice
speaker tonight Sofia bhakti is a senior
Reuben development planner and South
Asia region and the practice group known
as culture and inclusive tourism
development so Fonda studied
architecture urban planning and for the
design and Brazil and the UK prior to
the bank she advised national and state
governments on inner city revitalization
and her own firm in Brazil working on
these types of projects and she'd been
joined the banker and she mentioned 17
years ago in 2002 that makes her a
veteran where she's managed a range of
multi sector investment projects this is
involved in earlier years post-conflict
types of development in Africa and the
Middle East as well as South and East
Asia but her field of expertise as it's
been developing over the years is in
culture heritage conservation and it's
called inclusive tourism and in
particular in the South Asia region
which is the largest region the bank's
practice in heritage conservation and
development she led a World Bank UNESCO
study of inclusive urban paradise
revitalization for Indian cities
in each of cities that were the project
was brought to vent by them both by the
ministries of Finance and Urban
Development it's very interesting to see
what the different origins are these
projects this one involved publications
about inclusive heritage revitalization
and its significance for urban economic
development but a very different and
fascinating study was brought by the
ministry of water supply and sanitation
known as iconic swatch now for those
from India will be familiar with the
swatch program and movements of the past
years on shifted emphasis from water
supply to sanitation importance of
sanitation in cities and rural areas
this project involved was to involve a
hundred of the premier heritage sites
and ways in which their sanitation and
their environments have improved the
theory went could cascade and diffused
into secondary settlements and other
places of significance by the example of
some places ranging from the taj mahal
complex to mir sharif sufi shrine to
Tirupati temple and Chuck trip up T
Shiva T railway station
so religion and diversity Heritage Sites
in which this common theme was being
pursued pursued it's very interesting
I'm currently the projects that she is
leading include an international
Buddhist circuit heritage program across
several countries in South Asia within
India interstate Buddhist heritage in a
circuit but then also a 40 million
dollar project or program and the
interpretation tourism development
domain that's involving multiple
projects for urban improvement in the
vicinity of Agra where everything from
the sanitation to housing to
infrastructure or the address in
integrated ways and in a exceptional
heritage context let's deploy new
services member advisory organizations
and range from the European cultural
diplomacy platform to a foundation the
Sant'Agata foundation on the economics
and culture where she's lectured on
themes such as investing and cultural
heritage to enhance physical and social
resilience talk with us tonight is
titled why culture matters for urban
development in India we're thrilled to
have you here
it's an honour for me to be here can we
work together in this watch but are we
were discussing the other this what
those of you from India you know about
the swatch bharat' the clean India
initiative as you know in the stds there
is a target of 200 million toilets
most of them because of this is needed
in India so it's a huge program that
came straight from the Prime Minister
that mode itself himself from in he came
with this idea of the signature program
for iconic places targeted the hundred
most iconic places in India as Jim said
and initially this was done it was
supposed to be done by the Minister of
water and sanitation and they knew that
they didn't have the expertise the
different lands to to work or something
like that the secretary at that time he
had worked in the bank he is the sunnat'
Asian engineer he knew about he thought
okay here is an institution that can
work on it and they put the challenge on
us we let you do we had one year to get
everything done and everything means
action plans being in the municipalities
with the head of every single site or
the trust which is a temple bring them
together and come up with a plan to
clean but I mean initially they thought
about cleaning for that was literally
sweep industry and then Jim came we had
to do something so quickly you needed to
have a remarkable team Jim accepted to
come and work with us and is that the
whole show to the government the meaning
of cleanliness in Hindi and other all
the traditional ancient language and
these open space and is we did
everything from literally cleaning to do
we need to do all kind of things and
rehabilitation of the city's thinking
about clearances vanity the beauty about
this program is that we got for the
first ever
we got the government the local
government sitting together with the
spiritual leader and it was the most
remarkable thing we ever did because the
government we said okay you put the
beans and then we look at the spiritual
leaders and now you tell people to use
them right there stop spitting and
create all this and use your petitions
and etc six nine twelve months we target
activity with all this change social
compound and we use the culture to
motivate and stimulate so thank you for
that brought a big smile to everybody
and help us be better so regard it is
and when we were discussing about what
could I share with you today there are
there are many many many projects but we
thought about more than projects because
I know that so many of you working on
and leading so much around the world and
we thought rather than showing one more
project we thought one ought to show the
whole bank trajectory into that I know
there is a lot of sense there are lots
of people that they all will bang it's
how did you connect the cultural
dimension in such from such a
multilateral the largest world
multilateral even see the world there is
so much bad news about everything the
bank does but I thought why not to show
the other side there is something quite
remarkable the trajectory how visible
how we have from the development
perspective embrace little to agenda and
within that project more practical terms
rather than showing one example here
then to show the program we have in
South Asia and the visa for such age
it's not because I am in charge of it
but more important because this is very
new this is the mission despite the
countless there's no way of defining
what they have what is then started in
terms of assets yet within the bank was
an untouched charge no we had very
little done
we have done at least so far on culture
and heritage days a project in Pakistan
here and there but nothing very
comprehensive very deeply embedded work
so how we have broken the feeling how
can we start a bit and also interesting
enough to do this we end up by changing
a lot and many people today in the bank
say that this is the latest in terms of
thinking and doing what we are trying to
do so that's to offer you to share with
you and to hear from you and ideas how
to move forward so I start since you're
talking about you're saying with the
amount about South Asia with a margin
same countries and even an end to
develop and many people they always ask
how do you position cultures Hawaiian
development organizations work on
culture is it a means we say no this is
absolutely everything and how this comes
about basically the debate really it
starts in the 90s we had a series of the
structure adjustments you make
that and iSeries off with a deep failed
policies we need everybody back and I
mean we miss the entire development
community time whatever you're trying to
hold these policies they work more than
working you very very much focus on you
know and on sharing on the trickle-down
effect we were saying okay we grow the
pie you share the pie everybody's going
to be rich and everybody is going to be
happy people fail and at that time it's
what you show here
people like I'm not just saying all this
they started discussing about the
multi-dimensional aspects of saying it's
not only about money it's not only about
income is not only about material there
is a multitude of aspects that make
someone before
like for instance circumstances where
you were born
which family they said the same so at
that time this starch shaping completely
in a complete different way the whole
debate and the practice of development
and it was we lean this debate that
culture was brought in very very central
in the policies special-order bilaterals
start sanding discs
Canadian and organizations like ours -
what recorded how difficult repetitive
development framework that used to give
us the guide in our patient how we
rework forward we articulated why an
institution like the bank what the
motivation we saw what we call the
multiplier effects that in terms of
culture in from various dimensions from
social ferment environmental and of
course from economic viewpoint which use
a range of
but business I'm talking about the 90
right that's where the agenda becomes
absolutely becomes deeply ingrained in
the institution but before that there is
a big before I don't know if you know
our very first of all was given I think
that more believe it or not if you look
at the analysis remarkable the
economists they recognize that the
importance of culture and through that
law we invest in seek to the city plan
markets and other aspects being for the
reconstruction of France so it was the
request came from the government say we
don't want only for YouTube because we
were supposed to give them financing for
a larger strategy said but we don't want
to build any road we wanted to build
French room I think it has to do with
what you know
class today no but if the French way so
that was a very important lesson for the
bank and here is how we got into when we
we entered there and just as a measure
of comparison that we used to talk to a
lot
look at French today this is the first
tourist destination in the world I'm not
saying that they will make you
responsible for that what I'm saying is
the government had a very important
vision understand okay I'm going to
reveal to my country using the best of
the cultural news as the basis for that
and they were able to engage us when you
do need to have the word and everything
don't forget in the future don't forget
about your culture you're going to do
something very positive so in the 50s we
did that for a long time we want a
little bit this happened and the
situation was dominated largely
dominated by economies after that the
bank change
we stopped financing we changed to
finance what so called the developing
world action then in the 17th days this
is what I call the dark times
it was very much we had a highly is like
if everything we learn in the fifties we
have forgotten and at this time we had
highly dominated by the economies I'm
sorry to say and by very much people
thinking about so the private sector
only their phalanx and here is when we
finance the resorts across Caribbean etc
which were very very bad and that's why
I don't have any picture because
everything is so bad fair enough and but
I show this because it's very important
we start articulating and then we have
done here for instance because
penny out of this big big packet but it
was his work that really brought the
debate the whole county back together
here in this beautiful part of this
project that we did three things on we
help in the reconstruction of the bridge
and we were so many many players there
we help teachers in this area very thing
we did we went to the three communities
that were fighting against each other
and we said you choose something that's
important for you this is for important
for all of you this is which move back
but before that we went to each of them
is that you choose something that's
important and will finance it no matter
what you've asked three chart whatever
and they came they did it so we did this
Chu we give work which was a community
level with economic surroundings and
symbolic CG which
this is a very beautiful project that
came at that time as well we started we
continued evolving again then on a
spiral up when we started looking that
even more sustainability and these are
absolutely beautiful examples one is in
Honduras this is where hope and peace
which is one of the poorest regions of
the country but they also have what do
you need to spend archaeological sites
associate with the buyers and it's the
only one which has called and called on
itself Department sustain the entire
network of parks of big diamond tools
which is in Central America it's a very
tiny country but remarkable but very
poor and all these these peoples are
farmers become casinos they are here be
in front of the park so what used to
happen is that they used to strike in
front of the time so no but the visitors
couldn't come and this was a break and
huge breakdown in the economy because if
you can't do it open you can't educate
the government breaks because this is
the main source of revenue so what we
did it is and that's why in social
clusion
we focus exclusive on the people we
serve why is this happen so we provide
them all kind of possibilities like
these they are part of some of the
families we prove cows we produce things
that
and we link them to the hotels we did on
the other one is Georgia that move from
communities looking at cities the cities
they had but it almost there was this
huge economic shock in the two thousands
so we focus rather than the small
communities and people we focal the
cities we created we helped to establish
in firms and will be the wiser city so
from this small community to the
neighborhood and city level but it's the
same two very special thank you today
and this is the what I'm going to
elaborate for all of this has evolved
from what we call no cheese Victoria and
I'm spacious so it's not anymore about
inclusion and this is that is really you
go you have a place and how you connect
every step
mentioned within that specific place and
work one inch in depth is at the four
point is the most advanced location
where we are working and it says here
that's what I'm going to share with you
there is not one single player so we are
engaged from every single or I go
everything's you know scratched at the
door let me see we enter everything is
not only the minister of culture or our
development we are working with
sanitation we work with energy we work
with the Parliament we work with
everybody because culture is an element
of effectiveness for every single sector
and is so cross-cutting
and he's using actually we can meet
together so many of the signage we also
many partners as I say this is what is
the motivation
the more judicious what they
it's what they had
it's just started with 1.8 billion
people in this entire nation and
enormous assets the languages the
craftsmanship everything that this
people carries me then and then there is
nature and the landscape we provide
special water for one third of humanity
you have things you can't even imagine
[Music]
we associate a lot of South Asia when
we always think this is the regional
infrastructure and trade from a
political economy this lineage is a very
complicated extremely complex region but
when you go down take out of this cloud
and go down the movement dynamics the
vibrancy
and then we go down when you look at for
instance how culture if you associated
with tourism on the pole is the first he
foreign exchange revenuer Bhutan is the
second after hydropower in in jail you
saw the now ninety percent of the
population is remarkable but as anything
in the world there are issues and what I
have learned that the main issue is
culture in the context it's not as we
talked about all this but is completely
like there are two pillars and being
warm and people say all culture good for
leisure all the dead within
consciousness
and even in the bank sometimes I have my
top chief economist talking about very
elaborate and then I show them all and
they look at me and I then I show the
next page of the woman sitting on the
floor without shoes without half of the
teach dress very badly it means
something
and these are something that cheetahs so
that's is not well articulate and how do
we know to be saved every way something
cities that's what we that's how I start
working engine my first program was the
Minister of Finance they have
established they have given fifty
billion dollars to the historical
development to establish the largest
urban development probably the world
fifty billion dollars when we start work
is Ju RM when he started working there
the program was at the end and the
Ministry of Finance ticker article about
sixty percent of the money has not been
allocated and whatever had been
allocated and they had systematically
the begin agencies as Islam's because of
the infrastructure because of the way
that people used to leave
this is opera and easy
because of the way this agency work so
the Minister of Finance was so upset
with the news of our panelists then they
called the Banger sir can you come up
with the suggestion today and this was
one of the programs we did was we said
okay we can think about a different
approach which was a
starting with the understanding for the
culture is an asset for development not
a liability because interesting enough
despite the fact that they have this
thing all think about the pain
preservative
we have to preserve culture and I keep
saying and you don't preserve culture
culture preserves by itself you have to
support it you have to support the
system custodians in its economics the
process uses for instance an odd example
why am i sure the Taj Mahal we are
working this is behind
look at this either visit I want to make
sure that it's just like in the 11th
century but I go back to my comedy
comfort of my hotel but these guys have
to be either or you have an urban
expansion happening without any type of
planning how many urban planners are out
there there is no influence
there is nothing engineers I completely
all the local governments I wasn't
working when we were working in this
program I had it specially the Minister
of Finance and he told me what's the
problem I said sir
we don't respect the people who sit in
Delhi they are not teaching in the 5000
minutes palace we have worked and when
you go to this 5,000 minutes apologies
normally you have three people in the
municipality of reachable one is a
junior engineer that's it I'm dealing
with a genuine
this is the entire municipality
yeah abnormal fuss there there are no
heritage no sociologists no nothing
these are the people you are dealing in
this is one due to engineer who has to
do the entire work we work using a
language that was and that's something
very important the language there for us
I just invite development community
that's why I use the word growth and
this is also a language don't forget
like Mike
because of the wool bank we don't work
we do because we work with government
know my main counterpart is also
Minister finance and then through the
Ministry of Finance may have a big plan
and then we articulate with Miss
Victoria ministries but just to keep it
to perspective so that's why we do but
when I say includes the gross is a
language that the government community
allowing I mean I can start to the
dialogue let's say through a cultural
asset based approach to development and
that's a very important I mention
because going back to what we are saying
culture in the mind of most of the
development is everything now with a
disaster services is that there was this
earthquake in Nepal and we are doing
this huge program 1,000 and I was
begging my drm colleagues and say come
with just one word there that the houses
they have to be culturally sensitive to
the Weber's and to the traditional
country they're going to use the local
materials you're going to generate local
environment I try everything but it's a
no we have no time to have to rush we
have three weeks to deliver the problem
two girlfriends but anyway but she ain't
trying to change they walk I'm not
talking about cultural here for tourists
to come see I'm talking here about the
basis of what isn't there rather than
going and destroy everything and dumping
everything in a landfill
that's a repeal and that's why we
started to me and one thing we need is a
lot of evidence we need research how
much it costs doing new construction
versus rehabilitated and these are us
some people say oh this is D us how is
it in Lebanon in a dead center so we
need this kind of research and evidence
we try our goals are again
and look at what we call alternative
sources in that sauce for language that
works very well because that is stupid
thing oh my god
there is huge and then we yeah yeah
because what you are saying it's not
working we need something different we
say oh people in fact this is Nicole
so how we go about if you were here for
levels that's something also prices in
China we have been working for more than
twenty years but the entire program we
have in China is below this lightly they
start with environmental projects
start with sanitation and smoke
component in this projects which is
great until today where we have plenty
in our case we said no no no we have to
work in all dimensions it's very
important because is important to health
projects but we have got this also the
systemic problems systemic problems and
policy level points the single time or
one of the issues we found out is why
people are demolishing the traditional
houses because the banks because the
houses are made mostly of food and they
are dated and would the bank doesn't
want to ensure there is no insurance
they charge 50 percent more if you have
a traditional house
and we found all of them together how so
how do we make this happen we are
working at in terms of spatially we have
said okay let's work on you start see
this traditional filipino cultural
landscapes and here are the kind of
argumentation as I was mentioning
like this new construction generates
data towards job rehabilitation
but before that is also talked about the
data is talking about the new
construction is immediate jobs
permanent jobs we have rentals
the other one is working on the culture
well called creative industries these
not only today there are huge no
economic impact and then of course we
came here to the tourism which is a most
visible the most obvious one and that's
why I have ended at the very end but
he's very important
most of them because what's happening is
okay so the youth today is highly
educated but they created they come up
and educate the youth using curriculum
that is not equivalent to watch the
country can absorb like there are three
years back the amount of IT before it
will tell where you don't have
connectivity itself these guys these
kids are all in or the streets they
don't have a job so they come up with
that's what I'm saying about the linking
culture in everything it was a country
sensitive greatly we would do what I've
put but that context to be able to
absorb 90
cause everybody divorce talking outline
the idea vote anyway so what's happening
is you have valuing people out here with
a small little kids and the youth the 25
years old we are all in there is a major
problem
jeopardy because most of their
employment happens in the euro area
seventy percent of the land in return is
forests declares national is reservation
all these forests is managed by this
community so at the moment Alevis
community breaks down because of the
early identification ending funding
system everything is he is disconnected
it's fragmented all these women they
which unique which means everybody says
Wow
the land is amazing but this means
ability they are educated with their
brothers they draw this move on we have
to come back to their village
so spite of me indicated they said why
don't we shift rather than making
everything yeah we created these
artificial to people why don't we think
so you're working this program
and we are working with a historic
cities and I mentioned before we were
helping the Ministry of Urban
Development and the Minister of Finance
we tensed the organization that was
really adopted by the government and we
establish reading so I can do but for
those of you old friend
you can think better but mean so and is
the first heritage basic development
means first his scheme that was now they
launched is in 2015 and they just
completed this year so we have worked
for seven years with the Ministry
helping to test an approach of working
very calibration help you design of the
problem annotation closes so just just
wonderful experience of how look at the
cultural not as something beautiful for
you to put your shelf or for you to
visit but culture as the basis of a
fjord is our for instance we were
working Varanasi and it's very
interesting when we start working there
which is the most sacred city for any
Hindu and our colleagues from
interconnects
but when he started working they said
all this working to Reaper Tron because
I work to publish work in the water in
the kunais which have been built in the
past as part of an entire system water
management flood control water
management and and we start working and
we took even in this big mansion stayed
together for the first time to see
places was remarkable but showing look
used to have 158 comes water bodies in
the city now there are 28 all the other
words have disappeared because of lack
of planning approach meaning showing
stuff
they are the length change baby said if
we can be we will revitalize this you
can take care of so many problems you
have to see you like it so that's the
perspective we can that's what we have
be able to just show the garbage so it's
very between this and say wow we can do
this yeah in Japanese system is there as
almost the modern when you think about
we have time to apply today so let's go
back to them the second program is on
the filter circuit this is regional
level in this program we are focused
more on nature and women one thing we
are saying here is because if you look
at the history that is a car that's a
lot of positive economy when we start
thinking about the program using culture
in division again this is a very dense
complicated vision so we put together
all the ministries of tourism and
culture and say what would be one one
thing that you all can talk we don't
fight what is one thing that we can have
a pleasant dinner it's again if
everybody's very hot you get happy they
were put in their mind that they said
they put distance because they said
would because they are association of
the good is born with the philosophy
rather than so then based on their
feedback with that Kenny Powers so we
start we put together this product where
we are working on this places and one of
the most beautiful thing is that what we
are trying here to do this is a very
deep mental the main events related
Buddha everything happened under the
treatment where he was born where he got
invited where he journeys for some only
what God said everything has to do with
the tree so we are bathing being back
there back this notion of rescuing the
sanity of these places and this entail a
lot of work especially with the women
because of the way they are and also we
are here going back to the notions of to
some numbers places tourism that say
globally it's 50 percent of women so we
are bringing in very strong gender
dimension and an environmental dimension
here which are the entry points for
these why we the Heritage series we are
looking at walk of living conditions and
the third one is pure policies very
straight looking at policies and
programs and everything
licensed how if you needed to do this
moment L anywhere in English you need
like 75 license that takes you five
years and I don't know put everything in
between you can imagine so and that's
how we have hardness I was three
dismantled early so we start with a
small technical assistance to the
minister forgiving the one that she was
talking testing confession in his
forties from here we got because one of
the cities was my asset in the state of
Uttar Pradesh and they sit on this work
we have done the state government came
to us said oh this is Toledo we weren't
more free we want an entire project so
that we came and prepare an entire
project I'm gonna proud who deserve
everything you can imagine that state
was amazing and we are implementing and
from there we came out from working from
in four cities we were able to put you
to help the government she put together
a scheme that scale up from four cities
into ten states so the work we have done
this
and states from here we have done in
other states be kept or work engaging
the policies the circuit working with
the environmental team there's another
very interesting thing as we went about
whinnies were all the teams we start
looking at the Ganga
and then we get this is the iconic site
that she was mention in the beginning
and we could gene but we need help they
need a lot of help Japan she knew our
stealth thirty Jim we leave did you find
a way and this is my goal to linking
professionals like you with the
government's that I work with for me to
date for instance one of the main things
we are failing is on the imagination
they have it's so big they have all this
I still don't know how because in my
case I give all the money to the
government the government has to hire
you I don't know how they can find you
but
[Music]
[Applause]
