back welcome back we're starting thank
you for joining us for our keynote panel
from case to I a us our panelists
tonight we'll examine the links and
divergences between the conference of
Architects for the study of the
environment and the Institute for
architecture and urban studies I'm just
going to introduce our guest here or a
moderator for the panel I Sylvia Laven
so there's a critic historian and
curator whose work explores the limits
of architecture across a wide spectrum
of historical periods she received her
PhD from Columbia University and
published her first books cat Americans
see and invention of a modern language
of architecture and form follows libido
architecture and Richard Neutra in a
psychoanalytic culture with the MIT
press recent books include
flash-in-the-pan kissing architecture
and everything loose will land the
catalog accompanying an exhibition
focusing on our in architecture in Los
Angeles during the 1970s her next
exhibition the new creativity explores
transformations in architectural
creativity since the advent of computing
in organizing this conference you may
have noticed we decided to separate the
three directives of case Kenneth
Frampton Peter Eisenman and Stanford
Anderson in two separate panels during
the day that was strategic in order to
pursue different inflections and
divergences in their thought and now we
wanted to reunite them but Peter is
going to sit this one out
but perhaps participate from the
audience so Kenneth Frampton you know
him already but I'll just mention that
in 1972 he became a fellow in of the ia
US and was a co-founding editor of its
journal opposition's Stanford Anderson
who has already been introduced I just
want to highlight that he was a part of
ia us and he among his publications may
have on streets from 1978 which was an
ia us project and we are lucky to have
these case members joined by two
scholars who were also part of our u.s.
anthony viddler who has a diploma in
architecture from cambridge a PhD from
TU delft and his professor of
architecture at the company at the
Cooper Union and Vincent Scully a
visiting professor of architectural
history at Yale a historian and critic
with lyrtle at Princeton where he
chaired the ph.d program and at UCLA as
chair of the department of art history
his publications include the writing of
the walls Claude Claude Nicola Nicola
LeDoux the architectural uncanny or
space histories of the immediate present
and James Fraser Stirling he received
the architecture award from the Akali
American Academy of Arts and Letters in
2011 and it's a fellow of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences and he was
editor of opposition's finally John
upman is distinguished senior fellow at
the University of Pennsylvania School of
Design and visiting professor at Cooper
Union and Cornell she directed the tempo
hoeing
Buell Center for the study of American
architecture at Columbia from 94 to 2008
and among her books we have
architecture culture 1943 to 1968 the
pragmatist imagination thinking about
things in the making and architecture
school three centuries of educating
architects in North America she began
her career at the IUS in New York in the
1970s and was an editor of its journal
positions and of the opposition's book
series Joan has agreed to do a short
presentation of the u.s. so get us
started after which we will just get
started with the panel
Thank You Ana Maria thank you a random
for the this invitation it's an honor to
be on this panel with three people whom
I consider to have been mentors for me
throughout my career and also with Stan
who I've known somewhat over the years
and even had some opportunity to work
over a manuscript or two well I was at
opposition's
I was just talking with Tony second ago
about the difference between biography
and history and and and how how one gets
distance actually on things and I have
to say that it may be easier for me as a
as a half a generation younger to get
some of that distance but let me start
by by just making absolutely clear that
I wasn't there at the beginning and by
the beginning I mean for purposes of
this panel at the moment when the
Institute became the Institute I was
here in fact in Cambridge an
undergraduate at Harvard in the early
70s studying literature and creative
writing I didn't arrive at the Institute
until the beginning of 1976 but what I'd
like to you and I also should confess to
to yet another dimension of my my
connection to this material which is
that I was married to Bob Slutsky for 20
years so what I'd like to use my my 15
minutes or so to talk about in this
concluding panel are both my own
genealogical connection to this moment
but more generally to raise some issues
regarding institutional foundations so
apropos of this
an interesting diagram by the way if you
can you can read it here you'll see
Sam's agenda I've spelled out in
diagrammatic form okay so basically two
points that I want to make to begin with
here the first of which is that if that
case was not team ten okay case was not
an American team ten despite some claims
that have been made to this effect over
the years team ten was reacting directly
against its parent organization so I am
in other words it had a specific set of
both oedipal and ideological grievances
and a history Allison Smith Stan's book
team ten out of cyan of 1982 documents
this struggle in colorful detail the
members also succeeded in putting
forward a coherent if not monolithic set
of counter arguments in other words they
knew what they were against and I also
collectively could agree on many things
that they were for case on the other
hand at least as far as I can tell from
studying the archive and what I know was
largely a group of younger architects in
search of a program throughout its run
it never really managed to clarify
whether it wanted to be a pressure group
a debating society a social network or
an exclusive club the emphasis for its
existence came less from any shared
position than from a general desire to
quote provide a forum as its foundation
statement of 1965 enunciated with the
intent quote to examine issues which its
members feel to be central to
architecture
unquote these might encompass according
to the same statement the city and mass
phenomena industrial techniques and
construction technological innovation
architecture and other disciplines
architecture and political structure
psychology of the architect creativity
form history and criticism and education
and architecture this last including not
only professional education but also
quote the need for visual education from
primary school through adult education
the list which seems to touch on
everything but the kitchen sink was so
all-inclusive and been over so far
backward in accommodating all comers as
to be utterly bland as Colin Rowe did
not hesitate to point out at the time
there was too much we heard ana-maria
quoted this too much liberalist ik
tolerance and as you also put it boy
Scouty ness at least this was this is
what seemed to be emanated from
emanating from from one side of the
equation an organizational structure and
academic credentials and collegiality
could not really overcome what was a
basic lack of direction i diffuseness
but Rowe was no less wary of the other
side I think we can identify this side
with Peter which veered rhetorically in
the direction of the manifesto polemic
and seemed in his view to harbor and
embarrassing nostalgia for the messianic
vocation of Siam whatever course lay
between this Scylla and Charybdis proved
difficult for case to chart second
points second point the 60s did not
exactly did not end exactly on time
in fact they spilled over for several
years into the next decade
even if 68 was a watershed moment of
upheaval and spelled widespread
disillusionment
many on the left it took the invasion of
Cambodia and the Kent State campus
massacre 1970 the Watergate break-in
1972 that would lead to Nixon's
resignation two years later the Arab oil
embargo 1973 the demolition of
pruitt-igoe in st. Louis starting in 72
and a result in professional
preoccupation a la Oscar Newman a
participant in case with defensible
space at this point rather than any more
liberal idealism or at least
representing a certain change and in New
York especially or not especially but
certainly a darkening financial picture
that would lead by 1974-75 to a credit
crunch and a city on the verge of
bankruptcy and a federal government
unwilling to throw the city a lifeline
the rise and fall of the Urban
Development Corporation established
under Nelson Rockefeller in 1967 and
helmed by Ed Loeb until his forced
resignation in 1975 reflected the
collision between the idealistic
optimism of government technocrats and
the cynicism of a federal system no
longer committed as it had been in the
mid and late 60s under Lyndon Baines
Johnson's Great Society and models City
city's programs to provide the level of
funding and moral support necessary to
address endemic urban decay a point of
culmination was reached with Nixon's
moratorium on federal involvement in
housing construction in 73 and John
Lindsay's departure from the mayor's
office in New York the same year while
an elite think-tank
elite and and quasi independent
think-tank in Manhattan might be
supposed to be able to exist at some
remove from the direct impact of current
events in fact the ia US was dependent
on funding from state and city
agencies and had constructed its early
projects in response to them after this
fell apart and politics shifted
rightward moma under the direction of
Arthur Drexler and with Philip Johnson's
increasing involvement would prove more
reliable and powerful allies in fact the
transformations that took place within
the Institute from its formation in 1967
when the focus was on publicly funded
pilot projects that would lend credence
to the urban studies in its name through
the cultural is turn represented by the
launch of opposition's in 1973 turn out
to be a remarkably sensitive barometer
and a remarkably good case study pardon
the pun of the larger changes taking
place in American society in politics in
this sense if case was to some extent a
proving ground for the Institute it also
belong to a different moment in time
less launching pad perhaps and more
booster rocket something that had to be
jettisoned for the Institute to reach
velocity undoubtedly case late some of
the groundwork yet it's important
especially in light of a potentially
canonizing event like today's to
approach the period in question with a
micro historical concreteness so in the
interests of micro history and also just
rummaging through some boxes and my
shelves and also just to give you some
visual picture which doesn't necessarily
involve people pictures I've brought
some slides so you've seen the one on
the left case eight and then the one on
the right represents this
moment when the name case is basically
dropped both conferences taking place at
MoMA the left this conference we've
heard about called pictorial and literal
space architecture and painting the
catalyst for what would become the five
architects the book and the the group
and polemics of whites and grace that
we've talked about and on the right a
second conference at MoMA where there's
no mention of case anymore but many of
the same players that had been part of
case so far both of these conferences
take place in 1971 within the space of
six months 1971 I want to suggest turns
out to be a crucial year so I also will
call your attention to the fact that it
case eight after the the Saturday I
think it was event where the architects
made their presentations this was
followed by a debate between Slutsky and
frank stella two painters responded to
by Rosalind Krauss and the art historian
Sheldon knodel men the next morning so
this architecture and painting thing
seems to be anticipating things that
will be coming as does the title as was
pointed out although pictorial and
literal space of course is a variation
on literal and phenomenal space but
we'll we'll come back to transparency in
a bit so two publications that appear
published by the ia us in 1971 I don't
know if the one on the right is readable
or not but both of these graphics
contributed by by Bob Slutsky but
representing two different kinds of
events events that in a way bracket
this change I'm talking about so new
urban settlements on the left phase one
analytical phase the study of new towns
six new towns from the perspective of
cities has quote complex adaptive
systems that can grow and change and
Frampton was instrumental in this in
this project also it was also under the
direction of Emilio Abbas and Peter
Eisenman and and ten other people and it
was funded by five state and city
agencies including the Metropolitan
Transit Authority and the the Urban
Development Corporation on the right
what you see is the cover of a catalog
for an exhibition called art and
architecture USSR nineteen 1732 that
took place in June 1971 again Kenneth
played a major role in this but the show
itself actually came from the Netherland
so already a kind of Dutch connection by
way of Max Ruth alotta but also Herod or
thuis who had come to the Institute be
close to REM koolhaas there and MoMA
once again as a as a good friend of the
Institute lent the model for sorry lent
the model for liqueur BCAAs Palace of
the Soviets for the exhibition so
already really we're seeing this
alliance cemented and increasingly close
during this period another event of 1971
this is the publication of the Casabella
issue in December that is a monographic
bilingual issue on the or dedicated or
actually produced by people at the
Institute again with a lot of
participation from former case members
so a bridge but on the other hand and
direction for sure the title of this
special issue the city as an artifact
signified according to editor alessandro
mendini that a an approach or an
attitude toward the urban environment
that was quote the very opposite of
authoritarian planning so and is its
personal note City as artifact I as was
mentioned somewhere along the line
participated in a kind of code
translation of Aldo Rossi so
architecture in the city and recently
have have had some questions from people
about why we translated the word photo
as artifact rather than simply fact and
I think this this issue actually is is
some good sort of argument for for doing
that the art the word artifact was was
surely in the air in any case the the
issue was divided into three major
sections and you can see who contributed
to them I guess in these slides but the
part one had a famously heated exchange
between Denis Scott Brown and Ken
Frampton over the issue of the
commercial strip the las vegas pop
culture more generally in which Scott
Brown of course defended it Frampton
accused the the Venturi's of basically
affirming a the status quo in a
so-called non-judgmental as they they
like to say way and Scott Brown got the
last word here
stead calling Frampton caught midway
between a European and American social
critique of things and adding I quote
there's something disgraceful about
sitting in a plush American University
and taking superior armchair
revolutionary potshots at the
capitalists that support you there in
part two there were contributions by
Eisenman Rick Wirt bill Ellis Stan
Anderson and Tom Schumacher Eisenman's
contribution was titled notes on
conceptual architecture towards the
definition and here we find Peter making
distinctions between art and
architecture using Sola wet Sala wits
idea of the grid to kind of distinguish
it from or distinguish an architectural
use of the grid and also arguing for a
deep structure in form of formal
syntactical relationships in
architecture very much indebted to Noam
Chomsky at this moment part three
consisted of publication of this
proposal by Emilio Amba's that he would
actually be able to partly realize just
a month later in January 72 the
university us project a new educational
institution dedicated to design and
development in in he didn't realize it
but he managed to to mount an important
conference dedicated to talking about it
at MoMA and as I say January 72 so new
themes that you know to some extent
relate to things that we saw within
within case
discussion but already now being focused
becoming polemical becoming very
programmatic and and taking taking
stands on things that in a way case was
always vacillating over so another event
of this same moment in fact in
conjunction with the the conference that
the institute sponsored on architectural
education was an exhibition that came
from Cooper Union
and this was the education of an
architect it opened together with the
conference
it consisted of 50 projects by 40
students produced over the years that
since haida had arrived and become chair
of the architecture school that's in 64
and and Celestia also had arrived in 68
coming from Pratt and in in in many ways
we could say that it was precisely the
opposite of the discussions of
architectural education that had taken
place with in case it was as it was
titled a point of view one that insisted
on a kind of rigorous and coherent
position attitude toward making
architecture and and thinking out of the
making of architecture here you can see
a couple of installation views of the
show and the book also published in an
edition of no more than 500 copies 324
page pages long large format I want to
to quote you from Ada Louise Huxtables
review of the show which i think is
quite interesting well first the show I
should say was
and the book were funded by the Graham
Foundation and and other friends
including Ulrich Franzen who wrote the
an introduction int in the catalog and
while what he writes what he states is
that the Cooper Union work had been
produced during a decade of upheaval and
chaos in academia and in academic as
well as social values and a contrast
therefore starkly with the curriculum
confusion and striving for currency that
once saw at other educational
institutions in the 60s so Huxtable
echoes this view of Cooper unions
exceptionality in a long review noting
that the Cooper program run ran
completely counter to so-called
radicalization of other schools and
courses in fact she even says it's
counter revolutionary and writes that
quote while others rushed to embrace
sociology and interdisciplinary studies
these students are dealing in complex
sophisticated abstract intellectual and
aesthetic exercises deliberately
divorced from meaning and social issues
with a meticulous exquisite
draftsmanship that sense but shivers up
your spine she then goes out on to point
out that the students at Cooper Union
for the most part or many of them came
from less affluent backgrounds and they
certainly knew what these kinds of
social issues were about and had
experienced urban decay in their in
their own lives
nonetheless they they still were taking
this stand on behalf of what she calls
the kind of dignity of this kind of form
making and and craft that the work
exhibited so there was as I say a kind
of coherent point if you represented by
the show for sure everybody could could
certainly see that and yet it wasn't
absolutely monolithic either there were
divergences
different different viewpoints within
under the umbrella that were represented
in particular between hey Doc and
Slutsky whose students work in the
catalog is counter pose to each other on
black pages and white pages Hey duck
students on the white pages treated the
famous nine square grid problem a
pedagogical problem that had been
invented 15 years earlier at the
University of Texas in Austin as objects
as isolated objects and Slutsky on the
other hand his students on the black
pages could be seen to view the nine
square problem as a problem of field and
figure and so the thinking that came out
of adult psychology and installed
education which Slutsky had been engaged
in while a student himself at Yale under
Josef Albers and then found its way also
would find its way also into the
transparency essays he wrote with Roe
was played out in this dialogue over a
pedagogical problem here these are
slides that go back to the Texas period
when Hajduk produced this series of
Texas houses and and Slutsky and Hajduk
students experimented with a nine square
grid as a pedagogical tool for for a
introductory architectural course a la
Bauhaus I must say I proposed these
models these comparison see precedents
that we like to make I think we have to
be very careful so Cooper Union is often
said to be well you know the Bauhaus
Redux and yet they're there again are
are significant differences if it was
the Bauhaus one might say more early
Bauhaus like johannes itten moment
rather than what was to come but in any
case the
it's interesting apropos of this kind of
micro history I'm arguing for here that
this is a kind of reversion back to the
50s at this moment and the new formalism
that seems to be emerging in the early
70s kind of jumps over this decade this
chaotic decade of the 60s in order to
pick up strands of things that maybe had
sort of fallen out of the picture in the
in the course of the 60s the the the the
the show and the catalog also included
some projects by students that certainly
were attuned to things that were going
on in the bigger world including some
plug-in project one anyway that indebted
to our ki Graham and and just I mean
there there there is more variety than
then one would kind of think without
looking more carefully in this project
for example one by a thesis project for
a this kind of serpentine a slab very
much responding to issues of wind and
structural stresses and all in kind of
working working out the the scheme in
any case construction so we're not just
talking about paper architecture by any
means but we're talking about a wave of
making architecture and then thinking
about architecture through making again
we we saw a reference to to this earlier
the second transparency article which is
what these diagrams were made for made
by Daniel Liebeskind who was a student
at Cooper in the at this time the second
transparency would be published in an
issue of perspective the Yale Journal
13th big big fat double issue 1314 dated
1971 again in fact the copyright day is
a kind of misleading because the the
issue didn't come out until early 73 as
far as I understand it in any case
the second transparency article picked
up on the argument that had been made in
the first but particularly focused on
the issue of the facade plane and again
apropos of where things are heading it's
significant that again even though the
the the articles were written back in
the 50s they don't get published until
belatedly so transparency one was
published in 1963 but transparency two
came out in this perspective issue in
the early 70s that publication or the
preparation of the of these articles
that had long laid sort of unpublished
and finally perspective took them on in
the 60s by the time of the second one
this kind of stimulated a row and
Slutsky to think about going back to the
third transparency article which they'd
always intended to write never got a
chance to to finish and so many notes
were were kind of generated for this
third third article right around this
time these are a couple from Bob pages
from Bob you can see on the right where
some notes presumably for for kind of
conclusion where he's actually referring
to the the Stella no tlemen conversation
that that took place in that moment
conference but what he's also arguing
against here and apparently it
presumably would have been a pretty
polemical conclusion was against the
kind of reductive nosov kind of systems
thinking that he sensed is dominant and
lacked what he considered to be a kind
of dialectical logic and so that's a
peek at these notes also in this double
issue of perspective appeared this
beautiful publication of Peters analysis
of torinese
Giuliani for Dario building I believe
this is the first publication
of it with extraordinary diagrams and
also historical photos so Taurani and
Mies would have also figured in that
transparency three of you saw the
notation on the page I just showed you
but in any case we're now seeing history
a return returned and analyzed and and
this kind of thinking which also of
course enters into Peters own
architecture with a series of numbered
houses which begin with house 1 in 267
the same year the Institute 2 gets
founded also again is shifting things
now the book comes out in 73 toward this
new formalism but ironically going back
to the the education of an architect
chauffer for a moment another reviewer
of the show somebody who didn't unsigned
article that appeared in architectural
forum in a piece called 1920 revisited
said that not since the Ecole des Vosges
are had there been such a shining that
is the author's term so today a shining
display of draftsmanship and elegance in
in architecture and in a way we can we
can see in how in 1976 this might well
lead to the show at MoMA of the the
architecture of the Ecole des Vosges our
so this progression this this
transformation that occurs over the
course of the early 70s ultimately would
lead to opposition's 8 which was a
special issue
that was edited by Tony fiddler on Paris
under the Academy so opposition's 1 1973
opposition's 8 on the Ecole and dated
spring 77 actually so we're now in 77
viddler in his introduction argues
against any meat reversal of the values
of modernism and academic ism yet he
acknowledges the necessity for a truly
critical history of modern architecture
he writes it becomes increasingly clear
to that to that to accept the
ideological rupture proposed by
modernism itself as the instrument of
its own interpretation is to
deliberately obscure the circumstances
of its origins and the nature of its
production in addressing these themes
and seeing them as critical to any
informed discussion of modernism and
thereby of post-modernism it is not the
intention of opposition's to found a new
orthodoxy rather we hope to encourage
the investigation of the recent past as
an instrument for the analysis and
criticism of the present so that's the
first mention of the word post-modernism
in opposition's the word had almost been
taboo for seven issues but with issue 8
there a fete accompli has been
acknowledged MoMA's scandalous almost
decision Arthur Drexler to present the
this 19th century school at a Museum of
Modern Art was absorbed and now would be
taken for a critical exegesis and
analysis and and debate within the
Institute and so the Institute finally
became what I would call the Institute
capping a decade of evolution that as
we've seen left behind cases
here in Delhi in search for program
passed through an initial period focused
on public programs public projects and
urban studies that was strongly
motivated by funding opportunities and a
product of its time before polemically
identifying itself with formalist
aesthetics and European avant-garde
practice in theory finally to arrive at
a revisionist understanding of modernism
and a new historiography as its central
intellectual project it's significant
that this period of transformation and
redefinition also coincided with a very
uneasy process of institutionalization
one that never came to fruition at the
Institute both as a result of external
pressures from a city on the brink of
bankruptcy and also some insurmountable
internal contradictions thanks
