Thank You Joan
I think I made what was already an
unenviable task which is to try to bring
today to some kind of conclusion all the
more unenviable because to go from such
level of specificity to the kind of
generalities that will have to produce
something for which I can really only
apologize so you know I think it's a
little dastardly to put the keynote at
the end which which is to say to ask us
to and somehow with a projective
reflection on a day of reflections to
try to I suppose it's a way of asking us
to think about what can we do with all
of these really fascinating things that
we've heard and where do we go with them
and as was being said earlier today what
do we actually do with them and I
suppose it's really another way to ask
Peters question for the students here
today which is where are the big guns
and how do you find ways to resist them
and I can't really help but to say to
Peter
no one is fool to even buy a moment by
your decision not to join us at the
table that it's not very good camouflage
and we all know that on some level you
are the big gun or at least as the
evidence today if we could do a search
which somebody will instantly be able to
do for me which name was repeated the
most often it would have been yours I
believe we can make information up I
think we were told but but I would say
very seriously that I think that the
difficulty now is that you defined a
certain model of resistance and it's
very hard to resist the resistor and I
suppose on some level that's maybe your
most diabolical gift to the future
um so that being said I thought maybe I
could try to pose some questions to the
panel about what I thought of as the
three areas of concern that emerge from
today
that are the most productive to my mind
for future work they're not they maybe
we're not the most important then but I
think that there are the issues that
emerge with the greatest shall we say
salience for today so the first I
thought that if we were to try to
characterize the collective effort of
today what we would see was an effort to
begin you know not to originate but to
move forward the project of moving
history away from a genealogy of
Architects and towards a history of
institutions and I suppose for me that
raised certain kinds of questions which
I will ask you all in a moment questions
like can you do can you perform
institutional critique from within the
institution how do we deal with this
nexus of institutions it's really quite
extraordinary how stable the caste of
institutions were that we looked at
today how little room there seemed in
the 1960s with all of its openness that
and void that we're really describing a
pretty small number of places
interconnected and so forth you know and
how do we in effect manage this shift
from the history of architects to the
history of ideas the second question
that I thought was relevant maybe for
for our discussion was a question about
or a comment about the Academy both of
and in the archive it was tremendously
fascinating to to receive a kind of
avalanche of paper from Stanford to own
an archive and then
to see more of it being produced today
and I suppose I would say that what we
saw today was not paper architecture but
the paper work of architecture and the
paper work of producing histories of
architecture and we saw architects with
their own forms of paper work and I'm
beginning now to think that the manila
envelope the manila folder the tab and
the index card is really going to turn
out to be that which binds us all
together it's the material of introduced
of linearity as we saw it unfolding
today and we might ask ourselves then
what is our own paper work what does it
look like in the post in the post paper
age what does the Academy look like how
do we produce knowledge and so forth I
will just say that there is something
both fascinating and a little bit scary
about this paper work one was how
quickly we seem to have extracted the
same tidbits we heard a couple of
stories again and again so we saw over
the course of really just a few hours
little surprising tidbits in the archive
become the kernels of what we might call
a new origin story I also think that
those pieces of paper work betray
certain paper that talk about the
disempowerment of the architect with
their connections to the mayor and to
the this and that that if we added up
all the cost of travel and so forth I
would say that there was certainly a
kind of power in that paper work that
might be interesting to think about in
relation to the Academy today how its
funded and how it exercises power the
last area I thought that I found
particularly interesting was the
question of the relationship between
technology and information or technology
and the production of knowledge although
nobody spoke about it explicitly in this
in these terms we did see
the evidence of the transformation the
technological transformation of tools in
in the practice of architecture and by
practice I mean very largely the
practice of the historian the theorists
the critic the architect the
professional architect and so forth so
clearly that was this was an era of tape
recorders or we wouldn't have had these
tapes although nobody quite knew what to
do with them
ergo they got lost helicopters were
apparently a big part of the
architectural technologies a slides are
a bit we're a very big part of of all of
this so I would say that this is part of
the technology of our field and I you
know so somebody said to me earlier we
were looking at some picture you know
well this was before the era of selfies
no actually I would say this was the era
of selfies this is the beginning of the
selfies that's why we have all of those
blowdry jobs that we were that we were
looking at with great fascination you
know the way you look at kittens on the
internet but but there was a difference
which was in the way that that those
documents were disseminated which which
is to say that they came out of a
Pandora's box and today we had the
moment of discovery well we learned with
the microphone today that there will be
no moment of discovery because this is
all being broadcast immediately it's
it's constant I don't know exactly where
we go in this total capturing of
everything
I suppose Reinholds I would just say to
you you were a little mooji about the
the photographs of the parties I accept
I think that somewhere there's a
generational shift maybe in here which
is that one used to think that the
parties were precisely where the great
ideas were exchanged never on the stage
but now they're all photographed and
captured so there is no space outside of
this outside of this technology so it
anyway the the question of Institute
history's the production of archives
their immediacy and their modes of
dissemination and the contemporary
academy the relationship between
technology and information seemed to me
to be points of real attention let's say
between the era of case and the
contemporary and the contemporary moment
and I'm sure that we all deal with these
as we deal with students and our own
academies and so forth I will
I know Tony who is maybe the one person
who hasn't had the the stage has some
things to say about broadening this
institutional history a bit and I'll
hand it over to you and ask you to well
the question of institutional history is
always hard because one is always part
of that institutional history right so
I'll come to that in a minute I was not
a member of case I was adopted by this
slightly dysfunctional family at the age
of 19 when I first met Peter Eisenman
who as a teaching assistant in Cambridge
took over from sandy Wilson the
first-year studio and taught me how to
do Japanese detailing with detailing and
shared you screens I still have the most
beautiful photographs of the impeccable
models that he forced me to me and the
impeccable drawings that he forced me to
do with the ruling pen just like Paul
Rudolph as he said so I want I want to
say to one very personal thing and then
some institutional things first I want
to say that almost everybody in case as
somebody myself coming in I suppose as a
silver in the in 1964-65 has been
extremely generous to me I owe to at
least if not more than three people in
this room certainly the three people in
this room an enormous debt in
relationship to my architectural
education and and the continuation of it
if I've been talking about history of
his being a historian convention I have
to talk about my debt to Carlos T to
reign
Williams to Ronald gray into Cambridge
and to Princeton historians if I've been
talking about politics I'd have to talk
about my debt to a lot of my
contemporaries a TJ Clark at Cambridge
and the quasi situation this group there
where we read Alta Sarah marks and
became very very acutely aware of the
crisis of of capital and civilization
but if I talk about architecture it has
to be that meeting Peter Eisenman in a
very active way in Cambridge in 1960
together probably the same day as I met
Colin Rowe I have to give this one
anecdote because I I do have to say the
peter learned the great deal at
Cambridge I was sitting in Leslie
Martin's first lecture he gave the
theory lecture at Cambridge and at the
end of sandy Wilson's little perfect
brutalist auditorium in scroop Terrace I
was sitting in the back next to a short
man with tan pants and a crew-cut
who was going all the time and Leslie
had stood up with flowing white hair at
the podium and was just about to start
when in the room came another figure
going walking up the aisle going stopped
in front of the podium and said hi I'm
Peter Eisenman
and mercy Martin very gracefully said
not now dear boy
not now and and Colin Rowe and Colin
Rowe turned to me and said who who is
that strange little American boy with
the white socks
so this was this was this was that but I
do know that Peter learned a great deal
at Cambridge because I had to proofread
his thesis three years later which was a
trauma of sorts Colin Rowe Colin Rowe at
the second day when I unfortunately
telephoned him at nine o'clock in the
morning and a voice echoing from this
depths of the phone said never never
never before noon only note shot will
wake me up so for two years with Colin
Rowe at once a week for the approved
hour and then a lot of disapproved hours
of martinis afterwards
I met and learned about the 18th century
and it was of course in 1965 that
another phone call at seven o'clock in
the morning came to me from a voice that
was very familiar but I hadn't heard for
two years saying well you know I'm now
in Princeton I said yes Peter
and I said well we got this project I
said yes we only design a city between
Boston and Washington that's gonna be
straight and I said oh really
Peter he said yeah you want to come help
design it and I said well maybe Peter he
said well I got you a job half-time
instructorship
you're teaching with Charlie Gwathmey
and halftime working with me and Michael
okay you're here in June right so that
was me I came for a year to Princeton
and
stayed a little longer but at Princeton
a year before had come Ken Frampton he's
the second person in this room to whom I
owe an enormous amount it was Kenneth
who first turned me to the idea of
serious research and development of my
historical understandings I come up to
Cambridge as a historian and I was a
massive historian and so Kenneth was
doing a seminar on 1900 to the present
which was then 65 and he suggested said
well you should do I mean the thing
before you know I mean like like when it
all starts 1715 you know then usually
come to 1900 and we could like say hello
so so that was the beginning of another
Mead right if me was in architecture was
Peter me in the in the sort of criticism
and theory and writing was ro+ martinis
then me with Kenneth was definitely a
scholarship and Kenneth there very
gracefully at some point allowed us to
teach together on Luca Brasi a and and
we developed together a program of
teaching which at the point when Kenneth
left became an asset ph.d program in a
number of areas and I owe an enormous
amount to Kenneth then having not been
able to get myself after Peter left
Princeton to talk to him for at least
two years I mean those seven o'clock
phone calls really I mean I have a
family I had to work I had to get up in
the morning I mean the phone calls were
just too much so I knew that if I called
him he'd call back but that so I didn't
for two years then out of the blue
1970-71 I got a call hi Oh Peter hello
we are with doing this conference on
education you want to come well why do
you want me to do just come here come on
talks you know we're doing this
conference on education we're having a
Cooper Union thing with your big eyes to
fish in the moment thing just time and
talk we've got a lot of people George
bad all these people you can only think
I love it so I said fine Peter thank you
very much and so I wrote a piece for
that which then became the first piece
that was published in opposition's
opposition's actually was not until the
fifth issue of opposition's or the 60 or
over I know it's a six sister of our
positions when I got another phone call
Peter hi Peter you will not be an editor
off sessions well I mean do you need one
I mean don't you have three or four you
know it's okay it's about time I said
okay okay so so yeah I did six and then
John I have to have to disabuse you of
one thing the Institute was not
responsible for the special issue on the
the ethical the bizarre I cake perfect
and absolute responsibility for that
issue
Peter read none of the text of the
occult oppose our issue if he had we
probably wouldn't have published it so
but this was this was an issue which was
pointed for myself having worked with
two furry and his friends for a long
time then for myself a way to this this
sort of disembowel this sort of
extraordinary fetishism of the 1/4
bizarre drawing as being the paris as
being the inception of something and to
introduce fear later Duke introduced
Theory introduced Styles introduced all
the questions that troubled the bizarre
all the counter bizarre forces in Paris
in the 19th century as a way of
countering on its own terms if you like
the the MoMA issues so I don't think it
represented quite the historian of the
Institute as a whole I
just don't think it did I think it was
just one issue of opposition's
after that Kenneth did an extraordinary
to voice two issues on on Corbusier and
opposition's went on but in the
Institute the third individual I have to
honor that this afternoon is Stan
Anderson because Stan was always there
and especially during the streets
project where I was sort of seconded to
do some research into streets Stan was
someone who encouraged me was patient
with me
held up publication for me until I had
finished this extraordinarily long and
torturous essay on the street and and
published it and so for that and for his
sort of sense of nurturing the career of
a young writer I have to thank him today
so those three I I thank in terms of the
questions that that Sylvia asked I'm I'm
very excited by the fact that
institutions individuals groups of PhD
students are doing this sort of massive
you know post coolhouse scanning of data
of archives and and so on I was asked
the other day at a little conference at
the storefront who've just produced
another archive book another big heavy
book that you can't read with either
when you not with one hand in bed but
not with two hands in bed you know last
night I tried to read the MIT book I was
sort of trying to read Stan Stan
Allison's issue in article in the MIT
book and I fell asleep in it fell on me
and I have to say I work out very
sharply I fell in a yeah right in the
wrong place anyway
I I have to say that that when I looked
at the atlas when I look at REMS
scanning and interviews of the
metabolised when I look at the MIT book
when I look at
trip Stampin fold when I look at the
work that Sylvia has done in
relationship to LA archives I have to
say that they're they're incredibly
important as a first stage of the kind
of history that we're talking about
first of all they reveal to a lot of
students well they they stopped us from
having to scan all those articles that's
the first thing
secondly they reveal a density of
understanding and discourse behind all
the things that are in the secondary
sources the survey books and so on and
so forth which nobody had ever revealed
before and thirdly for historians like
ourselves who are trying to go more
deeply into and more if you like both
micro and macro historically into the
field it gives us a reminder of things
that we have forgotten the things that
we never knew of things we really have
to go and look at so for that I think
the archives standing in the and the
different kinds of institution whether
they're written by the institution or
not itself I think they're extremely
important to to to us as as as
historians and to PhD programs in
general that's do you this is a question
I'm gonna start with you but then I
under whether others here on the panel
would address this if somebody said
earlier today it might have been you
Peter I don't remember but somebody said
very emphatically that case couldn't
happen today and I wonder whether first
of all you think it's true that it
couldn't happen today and and secondly
if it whether if it could or couldn't
should it happen anyway I mean it it
seems to me that that all these reunions
of reunions and I have to say here I'm
not a revisiting I'm not revisiting case
because I'm visiting case for the first
time I never knew about case until it
happened but the the sense I have is
that a case itself as a as the kind of
position taking that was with that was
both necessary and possible at that time
why should it have I mean white of
course it couldn't it couldn't happen
today
but something something similar might if
if there were if there were a
possibility of and this is where I think
the question of resistance the question
of where resistance goes Peters question
of the that's everything everything is
okay or everything is there or there's
so much there that you don't know where
or how to resist it I think there there
have been minor resistances in the last
you know in the last 10 15 20 years
they've been the Luddite resistances to
to computerization there have been the
acceptances of computerization and the
resistance is to old forms of design
practice there have been resistances
such as the resistance is very salutary
resistance is that those I cannot have
heard forwarded in relationship to to
localities and and and regionality is
and also tectonics and I think now there
are certain resistances to the the
extraordinary prolific and very
thoughtful proliferation of of
parametric curvatures and I think you
know that there are certain I mean
that's a mnemonic for a whole way of
architecture but so I thought I mean
there are these small resistances
whether or not there could be a
resistance that gathers how many people
were in case all the time at one moment
what was the largest number of
architects 20 20 25 whether you could
get 25 architects in different parts of
a cup a country or whether a country is
the right mode certainly you know it's
certainly I mean there are certain
conversations like this that happen on
the web very very seriously the whole
response to the for example the tearing
down of iconic monuments of Brutalism
that emerged very very spontaneously
first in Britain and then across the
world has had a major effect on on both
rehabilitation and the preservation of
certain of objects in a way that nothing
could have stopped Penn Station being
demolished that's a negative operation
but in projective operations why not you
know well maybe this is a can ask Joan
to speculate about this in relation to a
way that you were describing the early
history of the Institute which had
something to do with or reflecting back
home case I don't remember exactly in
what context the formulation came but
about sort of a dispersed set of
architects looking for a program looking
for looking for a project we and and I
understood this to be part of your
narrative that was leading towards a
kind of consolidation which which I were
trying to serve the story the story that
you were telling to to to point towards
I suppose I was thinking in terms of
contemporary technologies which through
which these conversations would take
place and contemporary platforms and so
forth they do have a tendency I think to
erode consolidation and to keep things
dispersed and move away from program
finding or or do you think that they do
they do I think they do both I think
that that social networks today also
coalesce movements and groups and group
of schools I think we're seeing a lot of
that in in our field and every other one
today by virtue of new media and what I
was suggesting apropos of case VESA the
team 10
or visa vie any of the kind of polemical
alliances that have formed in the
history of architecture that the the
ones that have seemed to be most viable
have been motivated by a project by a
program rather than just the kind of
desire for a structure for a formal kind
of getting together I mean that's the
way institutions like say the AIA came
about I mean there was a need at a
certain moment for you know a
professional organization architects and
so there were meetings that started
taking place in the middle of the
nineteenth century and you know little
by little they got it off the ground
that's one way they were you know these
organizations form but another one is
where and they're really genuinely
responding to have an antagonist that
they you know that is motivating the
formation and that led to team 10
certainly and you know in the case of
Siam I mean they had this patron and you
know Madame de Montreux who was you know
what but there was a kind of moment when
modern architecture was no longer just
marginal not just peripheral or wanted
to be you know only a funk art it wanted
now to be mainstream and that was
liqueur bezees project to kind of pull
it out of the kind of you know milieu of
a kind of Dada or some avant-garde and
make it stay you know the the big thing
and for that you needed backing you need
funding you needed a network you needed
all that stuff but it was fathered by
you know a again an attack on the you
know academics ISM I think that you know
there's a vague diffuse desire one
senses in the early 60s for something
that's lacking particularly lacking in
an American context and in nostalgia I
mean safaris reading of you know that
the American so-called avant-garde or
neo avant-garde of a city of the 60s is
a nostalgia for something it never had
namely that
you know avant-garde moment and then in
the 20 so and I think Peters project
kind of comes out of that but other
people that are part of this group and
it's kind of regional factions I think
then share that at all and they kind of
break up along American versus European
you're a file lines use a kind of sign
of that so I think they're you know a
variety of motivations but I I don't see
any reason you know or any lack of kind
of formations today I think we have more
of them in fact but I guess I suppose
that was my my question a little bit one
one might argue that the silvers and the
whites and the Grays are all shades of
the same color and that today the you
know the the prismacolor set is well I
mean it's vastly it's vastly
proliferated abetted by all kinds of
things and for all kinds of reasons and
so I just wonder whether the model of
resistance that that we've been talking
about and and and so forth presupposes a
kind of centrality of discourse or a
centralization of discourse that maybe
these very technologies undermine and I
mean you know as soon as they're you
know because there's a grievance that
can be you know formulated and
articulated then it can lead to yeah I
don't think that that I think there's
more
you know diversity than ever now and at
the same time there is more
centralization I mean I think we've got
both these things maybe I could shift to
210 and and Stanford in two very
different ways Stanford you've been now
for a long time at one of the great
centers of technological research and I
wonder whether you have any reflections
to to share sort of beyond case maybe
beginning with the period of case there
was some reference made to the early
interest in computation and so
worth about about the way architecture
is produced at a school that's so
intimately connected with with
technology of a certain kind I think
it's a rather strange history one of the
things I've long thought about the
school of architecture at MIT is that
well it started when oh when I first was
here and for quite a number of years we
were still an undergraduate at school
and that meant that every fall there
would being whatever it is five or six
thousand students come all of them are
adept at mathematics and physics and
chemistry and they were the best in
their class
and they got it too from their small
high schools to MIT precisely on those
strengths they get here and they find
out there are five or six thousand of
those and and
maybe I'm not the top anymore and they
start looking around about what are
other things and then some of them find
architecture and they look a fine
architecture as something that is not
the science and technology now of course
with graduate admissions it's a little
different but nevertheless now we get
graduate admissions from you know
schools that are not technically
oriented so when I became head of the
department 1991 I guess yes 1981 we had
to Mack 128 and a couple of graduate
students who know how to use them and I
said you know somehow we have to mean
the other schools we're already moving
and I didn't have any college to talk to
about how you would move so I convinced
Bill Mitchell has come down from our
burdened and chair a committee at MIT
just start to think about how we would
enter into the computer world and you
know even then the its we well it
therefore it started there's a kind of
confrontational thing with there they
were
there was still an old MIT ethos which I
had grown up with and in many ways
believed in and didn't want to kill I
wanted to complement it but it really
was a kind of confrontation between the
the established a thousand a and they
knew this is coming in and you know of
course it's now changed the you just the
whole like this there's probably no
school of architecture that isn't
totally dominated by by computation but
we but we're not in any way
distinguished so I I don't I don't think
that the the least the business of
computation in schools of architecture
has made a great deal of difference and
our but are we in any way more in
related to the other technological
developments here and I I don't think I
can claim that the I think the the
school of architecture here is probably
very much like schools of architecture
elsewhere I was I was trying to in some
way figure out what the points of
pressure that we could apply to the
sense that there had been a void I mean
I think that one of the things that is
the most remarkable about today is the
sense that there was a void that was
filled up by a whole lot of conversation
which today we seem to be turning into
biographical reminiscence which would be
in insight as wonderful and entertaining
and productive as it is it would be in
some way to undermine the very purpose
of all of that original conversation so
to try to you know find some points
where today we might find voids or
excesses and so forth seems to me seems
to me important because I suppose I I
have to commit the sin of reminiscence
saying here just just for a moment but
one of the things that I find very
difficult when I look to the generation
senior to me and I suppose Peter you're
really the you know the first amongst
equals in this regard is that you all
have been
credibly generous to younger scholars
and younger people at least when you
sort of grew up after than after the 60s
you were supposed to have resistance
towards your elders and yet your elders
here we're always very generous and
accommodating to youth culture so to end
up with to end the day without a sense
that there is a new project seems to me
to be very undermining to the very
project that you set forward so I I
understand if my questions are not
immediately nostalgic but but you know
or or related to these things but but
manure me not to imagine that the real
key issues are thinking about technology
in all of its transformative capacity
today that that's both the void and the
center and to think that there's not a
particular history of architecture in
relation to technology at MIT which you
know perfectly well because you have a
12,000 pound book that just began to
discover it or I was going to then turn
to to to Ken because in fact I would
have I would agree with you that the
that the way the entry of technology
into architecture was staged at Columbia
is really very different than it was
here and thinking about the big
infrastructure of information technology
versus the formal curlicues of the
paperless studio which you both
witnessed and you know at very close
hand seems to me to be really the point
zero for that content the new generation
that were I think hoping to make case
useful for in some way I don't know ken
I mean we're where we were you in the
paperless studios where was your paper
Nicholas Negroponte and the architecture
machine group that that happened at MIT
in fact I I chaired Nicholas Negroponte
EES tenure committee
service career here but it grew a grew
up within the Department of Architecture
but it became you know an elephant in
itself and after a certain time as you
it was underwrite a headship certainly
is there after that we just sat them
decided you know it was too big to be
contained in the Department of
Architecture it was its defining a
different agenda and it moved off to
become the Media Lab now due to the
credit of the people who've been hitting
this school recently now the media labs
instead of being barely privatized and
closing out the architecture department
there is much more collaboration between
them so there's something to come
together where they have pushed the
forward in the technological world but
they've also pushed forward in such way
that is his in many ways opened in
recent years and it may so we may be
moving to a point where they are
actually somewhat he intubated again
what well it is of course bernard
tschumi that brings about the papers
studio in columbia and i didn't have too
much to do with that as you might
imagine and i wasn't hostile to it but
imagine no i was not effective in that
area and the one thing i want to say is
though has to do a little bit i was
thinking when you were talking about
institutions the way in which i still
feel this in a way the schools of
architecture waste their production to a
certain extent and although there is a
lot of annual books published by schools
of architecture they are in many cases
extremely disturbing because they are
you know computer drawings and digital
material that has been put very rapidly
into a book and and there is a very
disturbing feeling that I have anyway
that of opening these books and not
being able to tell one project from the
next or get any information out of it at
all because it's all
so blurred in a way digitally blurred I
think I could say and and then they also
also all look like each other and yeah
okay but but you know I think that but I
I think that the I just want to write
well I this question of resistance which
has been raised a number of times I mean
I think that maybe it's not such a
useful term in itself and that but it
might be better to talk about strategy
actually or about strategies in fact I
mean since we seem I mean and quite
rightly that you've us just to address
the emerging generation and you know and
to give them just the word resistance I
don't think is very helpful but keep the
word strategy might be more productive
you know to you know and and so that yes
I mean for example I Drive oil obviously
sort of played around with the word
resistance because in in in 1983 this
towards a critical regionalism has the
subtitle six points for an architecture
of resistance I mean I'm not disclaiming
that but I think that this question of
strategy and I suppose that coming back
to the question of schools not looking
after their own production carefully
enough you know I mean I'm not against
of course digital is inescapable the
digital but something recently happened
in Colombia which is that suddenly the
school started the student started to
produce the most exquisite drawings the
most exquisite digital drawings that are
almost like watercolor renderings
you know but not very very precise and
very and also combined with very intense
spatial imagination and also
organizational structure imagination and
I and I looked at these drawings this is
the experience I had last semester and I
thought where is it coming from many
ways you could say it's coming from the
very large tutorial stuff but I also
think it's coming from underneath I
think that schools do
sometimes change from underneath you
know and but what concerns me at this
moment which relates a little bit to my
thing about wastage and also to your
challenge to do with institutions and I
think one could say schools of
architecture our institutional that it
is a real test I think for the present
is what exactly is Columbia going to do
with these drawings now with regard to
the next annual publication you know
because if it's if it sort of doesn't
put them into a publication that is very
very precise you know and and I'm
beautiful aesthetic somehow they you
know it will also be disposable digital
paper you know I mean I think what
bothers me is this there's kind of
high-speed productions that schools have
done as records if they work but it has
a feeling of being disposable it's like
old I suppose I think it's that's that
would be a strategy I wouldn't advise
you know and I think the question of
what are effective strategies I mean as
if one I'm someone who still thinks that
though I know there are problems that
with with the term landscape urbanism
nonetheless I do think landscape
urbanism probably is a effective
strategy for intervention because it
seems to me this question of
intervention is what is the option to us
we're not going to unlikely we're going
to repeat the Chinese thing of designing
cities or moving 350 million people from
the countryside into cities in the next
ten years it's very unlikely it's going
to happen in this country so in a way
what's open to the to the schools and
then to the profession is the
possibility of intervention and then
what what are the strategies of
intervention I mean I I think that so
rather than the word resistance I think
the word strategy is something that
could be more but it's interesting in
terms of strategy the strategy obviously
has to be related to a condition or
account
straight yeah if you look at the
condition of the context which has been
described today for case which is you
know Peter when we saw the the
photograph of Rockefeller in the Museum
of Baba
looking at the the products all this
these groups was saying that yeah
we're saying you know that that could
never happen the reason he was there and
there is Lindsay was there it was
because of the Harlem rights of 1964 the
year before the whole city erupted right
and you know and then Detroit and so on
and so forth now the cities are still
erupting there are still conditions in
in the cities which are absolutely
horrific and even that people are
resisting against and that the social
media allows for even greater and
broader resistance so that something
that happens in one city can lead to a
huge protest in another city so that now
the conditions I think in terms of one
the urban conditions the conditions of
housing the conditions of society are
magnified but they haven't changed in
relationship to the individual citizen
and secondly from case they are
magnified in relationship to the
condition of architecture because of the
massive if you like pluralism that's
emerged to a certain extent without kind
of ethics or a moral or a or a
theoretical construct that gives
authority to one iteration as opposed to
another so that we still have the kind
of things that are so easily developed
into by nuclear you know form and
function of aesthetic aesthetic art and
and social need so in that sense there's
a need a case a need for the for the for
the construction of a conversation that
somehow cuts through you know on
diagonal as they as they in Paris in
such a way that we're not actually
saying that the
occasion of a space with a with a with
an or a kind of sense of spatial and
formal organization and the provision of
of housing and the economics of you know
capital investment and the policing of a
city and the politics of of populism and
the questions of how you deal with a a
politics which is a media politics as
opposed to a voting politics all these
questions are hugely magnified but the
conditions like that that brought case
into existence that that that where
people like that Goodman wanted to to go
into the streets and people like Peter
wanted to go into the formal structure
of architecture itself these conditions
are still the same
and so I don't see why I think yes I
think there should be those kinds of
conversations I don't know how that they
could occur but I think there are more
media for them to occur and more
possibilities for them to occur in terms
of strategy than the were open to to to
case members so why not let's be us well
I'm not I'm not arguing there no I know
you'll know why not I mean the only
thing I mean what is disturbing is that
because at certain point we talked about
the reaction of power to to riots you
know but you have this uneasy feeling
that power has gotten newer to this yes
and we'll just you all right another one
okay you know will snuff it out and
there will be another one but we are not
usually interested I mean the mail
distribution of wealth is much worse
yeah much much worse
I don't know exactly how to make the
comparisons about the opportunities
today and the ones that were available
at the time the case was created and the
Institute but it and malia I think I
rightly were uncomfortable about the
amount of nostalgia that has been in in
the in the room and we should move on
the questions need you talked about the
away from the architect to the
institution and I think there was
something about whether there are voids
that could be filled as well so I want
to go back and reflect a little bit
about the situation that Peter and some
of us follow you mean when Peter and
Michael and I were in Colombia together
they were in the architecture school so
they they were the ones who had the
critical assessments but they felt that
Colombia even though they were there
they didn't feel as a very good school
they had a great respect for principal
Goodman and it didn't go much beyond
that and others other architecture
schools in New York didn't have any
meaning to us either I had he still had
a great respect for calm at Philadelphia
and they probably did too and we've had
and know somehow Cambridge because it's
both Harvard and MIT you it was clearly
a place of advanced education but we
heard the thoughts about Gropius it and
in New York what museum was showing
architecture the museum about an art was
not very active then there weren't
others they were going to do it
publication when Peter wanted to see get
a book out he goes to the small bookshop
on the east side and convinces Brazil er
to publish a book yeah good Morris re
yeah certainly you know it we talked
about the void of architectural culture
in New York in those days and he was
across the country but you know the New
York ways well we thought maybe there
was something until there was something
in Cambridge but New York was it was a
void
so I'll talk about Peter because it you
immediately an individual and it's
there's a certain nostalgia but it's
fantastic
the after he left it had to leave for
Princeton that he pulled himself up and
made connections in New York and made
them start to work made Drexler do
something got the New York's new cities
exhibition going which engaged other
people got other people energized got
case going that God's people energized
made connections I started HTC here got
a good deal of of the conviction about
our own program was that many members of
case we're telling other people that's
there's a really good program yeah
that's the place to go it was a
reinforcing thing was building an
institution but it's coming out of these
personal connections and then you know
you've got the Institute for
architecture and urban studies created
and you know how it is you know how it
all spins off but today you've got you
know several institutions that are
interested in architecture in in New
York City you've got a range of
publishers there MIT press was a great
architectural published at that time in
fact we used their vanity press to get
some of these things going now it
doesn't even say it has some publication
but it doesn't even represent itself at
book fairs anymore as being an
architectural publisher you know this
one is faded and New York has just come
to be the dominant figure in publishing
my exhibition education you know the
whole thing so you can't say Peter did
the whole thing but I don't think what
happened to them
turn it over to the to the audience for
any questions and well conclude by
saying that I think one of the most
interesting things that's happening
today is the proliferation of small
centers of activity all over the place
lots of people doing publications lots
of people doing platforms lots of people
doing all kinds of things I think it's
very active and I think that one of the
models that it takes from case is not
the content of the conversation at all
but rather that if you want to change
the conversation you have to invent new
platforms for it so that does seem to
need to be in front of the importantly
it's the most productive thing we
centralized thing the most
technologically savvy thing
maybe the most optimistic thing also the
most scary things because it's a form of
instrumentation in fact without the
intrinsic content so you have to sort of
rely on the generosity and intelligence
of the people around you that they will
fill it with good content and make a
University of t-tests not to be so
confident and our colleagues but not
maybe that something that we can change
but it anyway I think that it you know
there's a there's a couldn't foots above
model when I suppose in the just
inventing your own platform to get the
ideas that are important to you across
and I think that that still serves as a
very powerful model for now that sounded
very
you're shaking your head Silvia but I
think we have to just always keep in
mind what those ideas are I mean it's
one thing about
optimism maybe it wasn't
I think clarify what I was trying to
suggest about this campus evolution that
takes place from the 60s into the 70s
I say that I think very much it's
possible to read the 70s as a backlash
against the sixties first to say that
but that the frustration this problem
the urban crisis narrative urban crisis
phenomenon that's been referred to year
triggered a reaction and that reaction
to form by your own sanity so I think
just you know five new platforms with
second two platforms and certainly the
issue is what are the you know what's
really urgent what's really pressing
what has to be addressed by the culture
of architecture in in any of these forms
and how how to bargain is agent is
positioning itself in relation to those
issues I mean these are personal into
strategic
blood said just four more platforms it's
not by five by itself we've got that I
just I'm really going to shoot myself if
we just end it's not a good thing just
to say I think I was trying to be very
careful to say that I don't know what
these ideas are but rather to look back
at this period which has been incredibly
interesting over the course of the day
lots of good I did a lot of bad ideas
that we saw being articulated but I
think it was a really interesting moment
in which in fact the ship seemed to be
away from only focusing on ideas and
their origin pristineness
and thinking about ideas whatever they
were in relation to how they get
disseminated how to get produced how
they get funded and so forth and taking
control of the infrastructure of ideas
seems to be really where I not feel more
optimistic because students seem pretty
savvy
