you
region asked me to introduce Hillary
sample and Michael Meredith of the firm
loss and very pleased to do that with my
clique Hillary our trainees muscle their
work and all three injured topics very
interested to him but in doing an
introduction for them accountants what
difficult to do a conventional
introduction but I can I can try at
least try a few formats or let you know
if you formats I tried out the first was
simply just to explain the firm as one
does to say that Michael and Hillary are
principles of apparent loss which is
based in New York City but if you want
to go much further than that and take a
look profile on their website you'll see
that it's what evasive to say the least
will simply tell you that they don't
really believe in front of profiles they
put their relatively uninformative the
firm was founded sometime maybe 10 years
ago ish they're not quite sure in a
place that I don't quite remember I
asked Michael for a little bit more
information about this particular live
in
biographical reaction and he said to
simply tell you all of something about
Hillary and Michael's hardscrabble
beginnings and the fact that they are
misunderstood creative outcasts looking
for an authentic expression in a world
of hustlers and bakers so that's one
possibility because as you can see we
don't get much from them that kind of
biographical introduction so so second
on the list would be to go through
project notable projects and try to lay
out something of their work that way
which seems easy enough to do we can
talk starting a little phone without
their installation without hours it was
at the list Center for the Arts this
visual art center a few years ago or
their installation in escalon which I'm
sure has crossed your paths at some
point a couple of installations at two
man that is B and I including the most
recent one their participation in the
moment for clothes exhibition and then
of course there their architecture
element house well known already at this
point that how does own the building in
Denmark and so forth but if I continue
down this line an introduction of
talking about projects I have to begin
to read out titles such as glimmering
noise rainbow vomit and so forth and
again we end up
very exploitive to say the least so two
more possibilities one of them is simply
to say that their global architects in
genre of global market tackling today
and I would say this because their
practices now work vas Canada in
Northern Europe and southern Europe
project for commencing Africa but then
most recently are working on an
orphanage in Kathmandu Nepal and it just
seems kind of silly to talk about a
global architect working in Katmandu
Nepal a different kind of category so
then we might simply say okay these are
architects who are participating in a
kind of or endeavouring to produce and
kind of total architecture pelada
propias or in more contemporary maincity
Michael Graves the building to the
teapot which would work and I could do
this because they produce furniture many
kinds of furniture they produced a
design software they have done an
extensive amount of piratical writing
historical writing notre underfoot
these recent pieces and office us agenda
on the architect srl market technology
employed they produced a range of
household objects bath mats cocoa that
sort of thing they produced a series of
the videos this then starts to lead us
in that sketchy territory because again
titles include things such as the
zombies are late and so forth which
again Lisa such a difficulty in this
category they're still and probably the
final absurdity if we start talking
about things that they produce
architecture I'd have to include what I
can only describe as stuff that they're
now selling on their website buy stuff I
mean the series of reproductions the
included objects such as Lily Reich's
guard bastard which you should certainly
check out and purchase if you're
interested available on ww hope so
really none of these seem entirely
sufficient to me as ways of explaining
and Michael and Hillary's work and our
project or also the best i can do i
think is simply to talk about conclude
by saying that they occupy a couple of
typical roles in contemporary practice
and contemporary discourse Michael
Hilary are both obviously designers
within the bar boss they're also a
teacher Michael Meredith teaches at
Princeton University of school of
architecture and Hilary sample teaches
at Columbia G SAP most of them were also
shop owners small business owners as
evident from the stuff for sale on their
website and both of them I would say are
also actors you can watch twittering
noise if
for this acting ability but I think
they're actors and maybe a broader sense
because I was have the feeling that
Michael and Hillary are in a way the two
main characters in some prolonged
extended performance about architecture
that I am very fortunate and sometimes
when they were played a cameo role or
maybe I will walk rises up to the level
in cameo but in any case i'm delighted
this evening once again play walk-on
role in that large performance about
architecture and you all I think you're
very lucky as well play rock'n'roll
non-growing production that is boss so
please join me in welcoming killers that
fall in America
an interruption so wanted to start two
things first the title building software
building objects building
texture
sorry
to think also about presenting world
people actually as Michael network we're
talking and getting ready for the talk
we were really agree
we basically the one
show a lot of stuff that stuff is
anyway you know we I think we tried to
do
you're going to talk about the medicine
we're trying to conduct research in a
body of work a body of work that is it
is a pretty flat and some animal but
still a cohesive so this is a kind of
challenge bro I think we see the we see
this is a
work
Momentum's that we are married to sword
director
if we spent some time in beginning some
ways
beginning that I never liked when
architects get to a certain point when
they say they're still young man there's
some beginning who can we are in some
ways but there's obviously another
generation coming up and just how to
start it was trying and experimenting
produced a certain set of things objects
and what are we building towards in next
year's kinds of projects but like that
so the first thing we're going to show
we started on how so we really don't
ever show her much it's really the first
thing
the it's in your ma Chester really
and very first project in a way some of
the
it's a
on a lake
first thing really about this project is
that for also the first house
a
the first kind of experience at the
house was from seeing from this
experience already confronting domestic
not from the front door
we're standing Roger car but really
seeing the very first part of the house
from truth
this section site section from the top
of the hill down to the lake so these
two things together
thinking relationship of the house also
this case of the section
the interior typically
small-scale a big lake house
to open space to my
rochester
so we've experienced time
there's a boy the tester that Austin's
is for passive environmental reason for
it
and see that the thing about this house
which lots of little mistakes
but like the one thing I would say about
it one thing that there's things that a
state away you know I think the pitch
was something that we try to fight
extended according to the
like this it became I think I searched I
think the mun thing that has changed
since this doesn't agree was that there
was a kind of search at the beginning
which was impossible for us which
finances etc the product was a kind of
try to distort buying these for or ship
them and I think that we kind of I think
after that experience
we realize that
the
we've always done little we've always
done little objects can't explain it why
there's no good reason it never works
out great for office but like the
there's always a kind of interest
things so this is a coding system we did
years ago kind of self-explanatory away
it's sort of a kind of problem of
repetition to some degree like some an
aggregation of these are human systems
kind of
at the same time
kind of objects olden looking at the
time
kind of objects kind of exploded into
services and then we ran these scripts
which kind of digital mold literally
looking at how it works and it was like
that like graphite you're obsessed with
like it's true that burns epitope what
was that waseem look so exciting the
thing that you could so you could really
affect the world and try to find this
space that is like where the building is
like the drawing so now the
representational on the real space gets
screwed up this was
the
thousands of routine
but
we were teaching and living in Taunton
so this is a few hours more
it's their small
many this particular site
 she
into
you should
who's failing structurally
duty
the freeze-thaw so they need to be
replaced so as as we were talking with
them concern over Great Lakes and the
shifting water right at the time it was
kind of fluctuating somewhat rising and
has how to think about producing a new
space for them and their friends and
their family that would come visit
summer months really isn't accessible
for me to just um her so very shortly
which in a way also started to build
upon some of the themes from the first
house passive houses actually there's no
kini for some air conditioning
but also
which have multiple families
so small and very rugged land so one of
the
in
we did the first project
with a sleeping cottage here and then we
worked on this but the idea was that
eventually
GZA this is when the economy
to connect from one side to the other
through the boat
actually I'm going to go inside so
thinking about it much more as urban
strategy
when we did them we did which isn't
shown here we did do a basket plan 55
these objects basically the same thing
repeated over and over again in
different sort of situations so I mean I
think there's it was also finding a way
to build being second
at this point we have her back to the
states for teaching jobs and we had to
find a way to communicate the
contractors
printed
huge hug
recent loss but essentially they would
they really build the project to the
model time
I mean one of the things also we've with
all the projects from the board is
really thinking about the relationship
to site
save but how a lot of our projects are
in this kind of extreme sites and with a
lot of panorama station very easy to
always give in but we try to look at
these different grounds foreground
background
I just show them
princes
and
but like it was a pivotal project is as
always at the beginning I think the idea
is the thing I would say is like a lot
of ideas were very slow at some level I
think the furniture and stops stopped
because faster but the architecture we
take we kind of have a few ideas that
kind of work through projects a little
bit of time and we are interested in
this kind of problem repetition this
problem a kind of generic or almost
because it's not protection I don't
think of it as protects journalists but
it's something that is a kind of generic
but related to the vernacular
god contextual first house in sort of
extreme
start is closer to this idea
and then it's more about this like how
do the nuance of how it's situated or
like its relationship to other thing
bored and it's like it kind of
excitement sculptural qualities and it's
all right so live in New York City but
some property state New York and wanted
to think about how the transition space
outside of the city or drawing and
painting how to create an awakened loft
pudding
already sort of collection of metal
objects on the sides like Airstream it's
already a very strong
right now I think these projects all the
projects there is a
it's hard maybe to tell but like for
instance as
these are our projects that are
dollars is quickly
cetera and it's really not finding
certain economies that you can tap into
what you're trying to build it's not
necessarily the library stuff for
academia but it's it is one of the
problems of being an architect so for
this particular case the roof trusses we
knew there's like there's like two
companies that resolve it with trusted
everywhere northeast okay they don't
really care what the trust is are you
can it's actually not only a few times
I've actually believed in about a mass
customization arguments which tend to
turn from of experience not really
but in this particular case from trusses
you can go crazy with them so I case you
get 12 and then there's this there's
basically the form is it someone
credibly conventional but then slightly
tweaked do these moment frames on the
ends and then practicing clad
he is basically it's all the problem of
the palms is just sort of disavowed you
ate it and powered out spaces which I
think for whatever reason has been part
of our work almost as almost like new
just like
composition
interior these things
how does one spell next year
so por DOS next is basically series of
arms which are related to the previous
work and also to
sort of contemporary
we're all put together he had a corner
to corner way to move through them
the shape of form to be 6 model which is
sort of an ounce they built and and then
this was our first attempt at filming
really for the time there was a real
crisis for I think a lot of people
involved in the project to kind of
strange prices but just a crisis of
subjectivity almost like not really
understand who the client was like who
are the people that are going to going
to live or occupy these buildings so for
us this sense of the program that was
taking whichever program has small
so we made this little movie at the time
I thing goes for really for us I mean it
really was for us to think through the
property through these people are and of
course the people there are fairly
generic and somewhat they could be
almost anybody
the place somehow the same time with all
these these things I think this is a
little out of sequence but we've always
been playing you know always interested
in say the tools of architecture the
modes of representation etc started
really working with processing
and he was writing the particle physics
part of the libraries for casey software
early music by the first customer and
starting to work with him too and then
developing these very simple childish
things he's little stocking fox /
incredibly pleasurable silly things and
then developing that into kind of thrown
cubes to containers and around objects
and and they had no place I mean really
we did this without you no way without
any idea of what they become this
particular one we were doing this and
then that would Toby's between
great harvest in Cambridge and we
started to develop other work with a
mobile bodywork and his work definitely
influenced us and hopefully vice versa
good nose and the started to think about
these kinds of problems of aggregation
which we already were thinking about it
may be a certain scale was started to
get out there and another scale kind of
tectonic scale almost and then worked on
we did this this is ready to a common
kind of comes from that yes
if we made it and it seriously Michael
this is like the worst of the worst
pitch for me but I've been rated like
I'd better like you man that we've got
glitter from every Michaels in like a
50-mile radius until they were told me
that over that another piece of
furniture happens in the meantime we've
gotten incredibly good i would say that
one thing that happens when you get
older amongst many things is like you
really I think we've really started to
care a lot more about craft of these of
the architectural object in a way
like the like we've gotten really good
at trying to find modes of working in
our projects that we're still developing
so we have kind of a good relationship
now supremacists metalworkers wood
workers etc that we can start to the 22
we figure out how to work with them and
how to work with the material or
directly so we're doing a lot
this one
we did I mean the joke was officer we
did we do have lost just one more than
anybody and we did do like three times
and then and then we find we were almost
not going to do it and then the thing
about the good thing about having the
two of us is that we tend to work in
conversations on projects like what I
was because this is awful i hate this
client all right this project are
there's no way we're doing that a little
bit it's going to be great just went
through it it's going to be fantastic
and then the kind of cycles around like
that whole talk about interested in
craft because this project is literally
it's a
this is my favorite so there's a pipes
that go underground another disk so you
can backfill it and the weight of the
soil was enough to overturn II I mean
the things I was interested about is in
all the projects i would say have been
incredible learning curve for us to me
that's the kind of amazing life of an
architect
professions that you made our I
hopefully not but like you really learn
our job you know like you are figuring
out things because you're it's all being
made up at the time so like we knew that
we wanted work with standardized clans
week we went to every engineer we knew
that we that we wanted to work with
would be willing to work with us
probably and they're all like you know
we can calculate this is too light and
what a structure for traditional
engineering what they all recommend it
was just doing mock ups and testing to
failure which is what we did do so we
end up learning of this incredibly
directly parabola playing and there was
a lot of moments I mean these smokes
back they they went to a whole range of
different kind of
and the other than 40 to 45 feet tall
and just worried about went mudding and
was the rainiest summer on record I
think ourselves
and so
I guess after this was the first time we
thought we would try to film the thing
and durable period of projects that were
very temporary and I have a certain
scale so while we had built two houses
and the weirdest to do was just finished
just brought what it brought in terms of
projects you can't predict kind of
practice at least not beginning and one
do some kind of work so
did a lot of different projects and felt
that they were it's kind of discrete
moments and could be think about giving
more out of the things probably drive
some of the work also whether it's code
books or furniture that can there be
more more more questions that come from
it or we need to think about some more
contemporary
I think I mean that all of these
archives for now let's for certain
anxieties or desires or whatever the you
know where we can we can't I mean
there's no text really
usually like we would we could think
about architecture through the movies in
a different way you meant it's very
obliquely I mean most of the texts and
scripts for these things are
thoughts or whatever on the field of
architecture usually are scrambling
people's names in there that we
sort of playing with or were there for
us they were just working through things
I mean even if they go nowhere and they
really do go nowhere I mean generally
all most of the movies the structure is
such that they just repeat so this is
one of the few that we
it was the press is really a lot about
autocar to some agree an idea of an
awkward sort of this that gets destroyed
by a mechanical system that breaks down
visually so for the this kind of camping
they've had or what sort of faults are
much I know if you know going on it was
obsessed with like in search of
so it has a kind of
this reason
this was erased but like the young
element house I just at attention
deuce
in visitor center
museum base in Denver
artist site
machines projects
this project starting just finishing now
so
and this idea of slow project
the irony is like it was done in sibson
the basic form of the whole thing was
done in like a few beats it's just been
because it's so remote
it's just like it's been incredibly slow
but it's almost time and it would be the
startup I was a sightless I mean that
were the Costa we have declined the
really interesting client she wrong
system checking she was I think this is
like a bit after effect
she became obsessed with this idea of
architecture of the scale somehow to ala
see
clients I still don't understand how
that works can't remember having bedroom
she's been fantastic interested in
conversations very like we we did all
these movies let me show too when she
just was like I don't understand any of
it but it looks interesting i think she
she she's been most people would with my
way and
process so these are some in tears
unfinished because either problem in the
last year it's just now getting
photographed this tweet
smaller good
tables
I just
smalls
and really want one of these things
design to meet or bus in the middle of
this best her
and you start to think okay well what
people want to do and part of it is this
thought for us that comp aren't we push
the furniture literally like that space
between the furniture and the
architecture and try to find something
that really is and he both like us like
this other scale it still reads to be
like a table and Michael small only cuz
we had worked on tables
which are almost
and starting to just for us kind of an
opportunity to think about that those
kinds of effects more software this was
a poor actually kind of competition I
think that we were headed to do
something China too
skill development and we could go out
it's we just started looking at these
s x
and starting to just just cost analysis
gavage priest performs
yeah we've ND got we couldn't do the
basically we left the competition
because Europe anymore if I'm doing this
can be realized client there's no way
other software pieces just basically
playing around with
Springs and rigid bodies
this is for the best canal
Heather other movies we did is for also
this was for
project same time as the best biennale
thinking about
projects from PS
because to hear that 12 didn't thinking
about relationships between people and
the culture how to create
completion of grass dr.
one of the oldest arts arts high school
for high school effect after I slowly
for college students semester 2
art graphic design tog raphy
architecture campus which is some of
these
Pacific you and that has both studios
but also students were living buildings
under school part of the campus for the
damage on the main sort of Paul here so
the director is trying to some of the
ways
promotes to use
here so
simony to so some of these things that
we've been interested in type form of
vernacular
which is into water dustrial abstract
so here but just for instance
he asked us since we started the project
with senior citizens
and that
would give us two weeks to do something
mr. starts
she liked abuse and okay two more weeks
and we just kind of work that way
basically from two years to the project
unlike mostly everything else okay
forms for the studio so they're forced
to use to
so changes say how then creating a roof
that overhangs to create an outside
porch outside the inside but also
through Square Windows really create
very open relationship across the
studios and being able to see what
someone in architecture might be doing
cross cross
distance
really one of the things that we did
with the models test it was the thinness
of the buildings became really important
so that you could always
you can see through you can see through
them so you can see the people working
we also see or
the shared space
and started to building on a sense of
really basic way of between all that
they didn't really have that before so
one of the things like that was frost
and i think about the project which is
completely was actually kind of exciting
is that we really tried to insist a lot
of chairs underneath all the porches
across was kind of you know we said we
really have the luxury of you
so it's also a project very low budget
things like how to how to apply it's a
rain screen
Senate panel joints
between the panels or place so we could
be more facial
that's a little kind of space
sort of aluminum channel behinds of the
light
so we're invited
I teens
and
pick suggest which of there were eight
different cities in the US for study
Orange New Jersey part because of its
relationship to New York City to push
some of the issues and type of thinking
about what it means to work in the
context of a place that we were being
asked to look at for this issue for
clothes when we found in fact or other
urban issues not just a suburban problem
actually an urban problem early doing
housing but relationships to live work
issues around different economies to
produce new economies and if we were to
redevelop something in Orange particular
neighborhood transit village and what
could it be to look at a kind of private
property that can be public property
rules
one of the things that was left over the
streets
this
I think doses for sure I think the I
think that was a anxiety or whatever was
the problem of things you have a large
scale again in terms of cities which i
think is a kind of crisis
because because we were focusing on
making movies maybe we have a sort of
imaginary conversations where people
look at
or Jane Jacobs is starting to think
about this the failures of us a
large-scale organization in the 60s and
because the exhibition bomb was also
tied into a bunch of kind of history of
exhibitions that say architects and
interventionism the city's participated
loosely and the thing is what process
could we think both totally large scale
on the small scale and then once you
started to figure out a site for that
intervention of that it becomes
impossible because property is so like
to do something at one block is like 20
different property owners and you know
that
no way you can get consensus so the only
space left for that this kind of promote
public is the street which actually is
the more you look at Street has rights
on the street it becomes it's not as
public as we all think so the question
was pretty use this screen as a
ground for new social nonprofit social
development where the city is
I think sort of kind of commentary on
cities are developments
history leading
issues how's the relationship between
the pork potentially VP thought
associations were no longer
situation so in this case pink is
didn't have to be
exposing stairs
some of these these things that
cities how how is it the orange so close
to New York and yet food deserts
material structural aerated concrete
that was part of that history
steep stairs
with the referencing construction in
each city emerged
and then also
starting to
through produce a most charter that's
all
this project
is a orphanage
Park about education
those six months
grass of the
so building in the site is interesting
as you're coming out of talking about
orange and zoning in this case there's
really
there are structural ironmen seismic
very kind
I'm just there
yeah do that in this case the building
houses sir
emergency refuge in the event
earthquake but that was basically the
project was as much about
to perform finding as it is about the
general sort of her arms like it
sustaining project client is very
interesting issues estate
project and supports itself
projects now
for years
beginning
missions the structural logic but also
it's just built which is this 30
centimeter concrete with felony also the
idea was just to densify the
kind of issue around children kids
security so that as part of it is about
create some certain level of
transparency
yeah but also a way to see who's coming
stairs are as much very
we've been also revealing
particularly
where
goes up
domestic even in its form but also
Brown's library
space so this is sort of a library space
diny worries smaller classroom
planted
serves education
virtually with other students
sweet
but like didn't you know it turns into
small hole for a pavilion in France
the check from lili dog in a way years
old promptly these kinds of services so
you know basically just like as silly as
the blocks tumbling this is just like
you have this surface is kind of a
handkerchief when you click on it the
rise of the air and what falls down
rumbles up or some other teresa
semi-stable for and then looking at that
stuff you know there is a kind of thing
how do you use that these things that
you so this is a kind of recent project
in my eight just need asked to do a
facade for it's very weird it's kind of
the commercial
Ordos or something kind of Street
scenario where there's every architect a
lot of them from LA since I get a little
portion of the street to do the side so
what do you do in that scenario you
start to think about kind of vary these
things may I still think there's so much
content for us is like the exciting
thing is it takes a while but the
Gnarlies moments of something happens in
the office like for instance this is
this is isn't that different in a way
very common it's just played out in a
different way I mean it's not it's just
now just
shoes the thinking about that and feel
like there's still time potential for
these things as literally facades or
windows the still working through it so
this this is a mark is basically marble
the year my tweets and stuff three feet
deep to make these things up here more
like holes and then there's sort of
glass
this Stella person 13
how's an upstate this started
construction
sure smaller little things this is a
benz penology la which is still up it's
basically
lots for me
wave
wall outlaws stuff these are resident
there's material here this material is
related to a lot of research which phd's
at work on in terms of cataloging
indexing the materiality real wall in
Pompeii and these these get they become
part of the recipe of these blocks and
then the blocks can we wanted to give
them away they kind of wanted to slow it
down that was the most interesting part
of the whole conversation I me like it
was the debate about how fast if you
could go away and so really luchia
developed a kind of system of
obsolescence I was kind of happy to let
it go but I think it would have more
interesting like this sexual so you can
see the thing is kind of excited was
just to wash the directional this
they're people who just won't do it ever
like they're basically all the same I
mean they're like they're you know
there's differences material things but
somebody will steal block there and it's
just like I don't care about or anything
else and just grab it knocks everything
over to the end up with the positive
level and what Tim was saying at the
beginning I think we're just going to
end on this kind of return to stop which
is how we started as architects and
continue to like a litter of the world
the think things are objects we've been
doing these objects we set up I think
competitive special kind of Etsy over
the summer and also this idea wishing to
you as how do you find other bottles for
stuck in fourth so we've been working on
just making things
these are the scented candles and we
will make up destroys their own kind of
faux reproductions of both the
architectural objects so this is this
supposedly so that really like maybe
while she was a student now all kind of
the stories are such that it's always
kind of really questioning the role of
authorship to sound agree to this like
like the yellow stool is supposedly like
was a doodle that was erased while Bob
insurer's working for Louie Cohn on the
margins of a piece of paper that somehow
we found this a traced to Dolan you know
object out of it so it one level they
seem they're completely ridiculous
another level we think that they kind of
allow us to start thinking about the
possibilities of other potential forms
of discipline narratives
I
while
I really
congratulate
here's the button okay you mentioned in
perfect peace the possible fiction
gravity and easiest work and now you're
returning to sort of fake story over
feet and these objects was that always
over the path or you just compacted in
the things where the film's always and
dialogue even plausible our potential
history of possible are like I think the
objects the things that we've item is in
a way at least in our education under
always like we're trying to get stuff
like the worst possible stuff that arc
to escape really serious around we stock
a huge list for but like like scented
candles you know like that like that to
me is like you know like that even
though that's why the first one wasn't
into candles it's about lowes and often
a determinate of this idea that Louis
was wants a stupid Hoffman back
but it seemed like it confused the
situation in a productive may be
horribly awful way and with express was
productive and that that dialectical
model and get played with so you know
you were if you were corrupt especially
not critical let's say two years or
whatever we like you know if you are a
Hoffman person that would be like an
insult that would get thrown around you
were like like anyway graves I'm sure
like Iseman things like that crack for
target is like the death for that and it
might be but the strange thing is as
always you know I don't know we still
like I don't know what you do with it I
mean I don't feel like it's like a you
know we're trying to find some other
space occupied by still dealing with our
own baggage so it's probably there but I
never
really let loose right we still try to
figure out support when she was hanging
on the airplane right over by the case
we're gonna say and I think we have a
sense of what we're doing but you know
we try to put a lot into it but then at
the same time it's always evasive to us
consequently artwork you know that's the
thing that's good about about making
things
these are much smarter in March and then
you are you know they court you know
they can they kind of change over time
they can lead you to look back at
something you did years ago and also
something else out of it so
lastly is the limited edition part of
the joke as well yeah I mean I think
they're kind of horribly price by the
way so the the problem is we we tend to
really want to make everything this is a
kind of late modernist thing like we
really do want to because cheap as
possible the problem is like what I
really did a bath of like salary like we
you know like people in office it's kind
of where it comes out to but you know
the limitation is part of also the idea
like if it did part of it i guess the
jail gave on that of all kind of its
rarity and then but also the reality of
like
maricela did some years old we must away
but like if you sell one ever the first
one we sold it was a routine apps we
never thought about how to package it
you know it was like a three day
exercise and packaging or something like
Elvis maybe longer it's like person any
fingers
you know
