so simply because we have no more room
for anyone come anyway thank you all for
coming
my name is Nasir Appa and I'm the
convener of this lecture series and I'm
very happy today to have the director of
our sister organization it was actually
our older sister organization his
organization was founded in 1977 our
organization was founded organization in
Libya program was founded in 1978 and we
actually are organically connected even
though administratively we're not and we
came into being as a program for the
study of Islamic architecture as a
response to any to intellectualize the
celebration of architecture that year a
friend award was put together in order
to achieve in order to basically bring
an interest in Islamic architecture to
the world and to a level of recognition
that it didn't have before Nia and ward
I don't know how many of you know about
the history of the earth in a world but
it has been glorious namely it has
actually really achieved something that
could not have been achieved without
establishing an international award with
the kind of stringent and extremely
thoughtful conditions about nomination
selection evaluation and ultimately the
reward what it has done is something on
two levels it has actually heightened
the interest in Islamic architecture in
the Islamic world and helped improve the
quality of architecture that is being
produced in Islamic world and has
allowed that architecture and you could
see it in the development actually of
the kind of projects and the quality of
the
over the 14 cycles that it has had so
far
it allowed those project and that that
architecture to connect to trends and
development in architecture across the
world and to get itself to be noticed by
those strengths of architecture at the
same time it has also shifted and
changed the discourse about architecture
in Istanbul when it first started one of
the sharpest critique of the Alpha word
came from civic identity politics it was
actually an award at the beginning that
felt that it needed to assert an Islamic
identity to an architecture that it did
not have that recognition ultimately the
award came of age and the award today is
basically a word about architecture that
happens to be produced in the Islamic
world but it's an architecture that
needs to be recognized and needs to be
celebrated for its architectural
qualities not for its responses to
Islamic needs for expression or self
expression which some of the earlier
projects heavily emphasized so what this
our speaker today
Shanny has actually witnessed this
he arrived in Europe an award fresh out
of architectural school in 1982 we met
actually around the same time and he
started working and moving all the way
up to becoming the director of the fan
2006 he basically had witnessed all the
development and I would say that he
probably had played a much more
important role than he would admit in
the development of the world or that he
would allow himself to have me and he is
really one of the major movers and
shakers of the Infanta Gordon has been
that way silently modestly he never sort
of like would come out and say this is
really what this award to moon moving
elections that Farouk wanted and I
witnessed that because also I've been
around this time so I'm very happy that
Farouk is actually here today to speak
about the award in general and about the
14th cycle of the award which six
projects have been awarded and the same
money happened in Kazan in the Republic
of Tatarstan in Russia this last October
and some of us in this room were there
and Farouk has taken the award on the
road again to introduce the working of
the award the goals of the award and the
celebration of those that have been
awarded this is something that Peru has
actually nurtured since the beginning
which is basically to establish what
something that we're not doing here
today but to establish a series of
seminars related to the award and to go
into different countries to introduce
through the awards and through the
projects awarded the themes about what
is today the interest in the field of
architecture in Islamic world so you
could see if you look at the development
of all of these seminars all of these
discussions around the world the kind of
interest the kind of concerns the kind
of problems that architecture in the
Islamic world has been facing in the
last
essentially so I would actually say that
without their hand over the study of
contemporary architecture in the Islamic
world would have been really quite
underdeveloped and if there is an
achievement to the award is not just a
recognition of the projects but actually
is that nurturing that cultivation of a
discourse on architecture that is now a
strong discourse a competitive discourse
to other discourses that are determining
how architecture is thought about in our
day and age so we would start the event
today with sort of presenting the award
for probably half an hour which means
that we're keeping you for a very long
time because after four finishes the
three elephant professor in this room
would come to this table and we'll
discuss with Farouk the points about the
award for architecture industry are
myself and guru nishapur ludia FM
professor from Harvard and Jim Wescott
the FM professor from MIT so we arranged
for some youngish discussion we will try
to be extremely brief in our comments
that we won't keep you longer than we
usually do
[Applause]
[Music]
introduction long gone last week in
London I started I was giving a talk and
looking at the people sitting around
story came to our mind I'm gonna repeat
which is that that's what you call just
story once the village
so in the evening he goes and preaches
it goes up and says do you know what I'm
gonna talk about and people said no he
said if you don't know what I'm gonna
talk about what's what should I do that
so he goes next day he comes well said
and he says you know talk about it yes
so then the third day he came and people
said okay how about me saying yes half
would say no then he would say what he
was gonna say so they said no I said yes
and they said well those who know those
half tell the other ones because a lot
of people are sitting here you've been
involved with the award since all these
years you've known us I mean I've been
in different capacities or see Bob and
undergo attack work with some people
moments and I had this privilege of
being it's doing this thing for such a
long time now today I was I had my I've
structured this first I want to do get
not to say too much and sure film and
then say okay let's discuss this
gentleman called me in the morning said
no no I prefer supplies no film story
together the story's going to be in
three parts I'm going to talk about the
history of the award working cycle and
then I'll present the six projects so
what happened is that all of you know
there's something gentlemen here who
makes all these posters so this is the
another story who tried to bring so when
I went to his office right now and I
said where is this way to get this photo
he said oh this is fun
this is a plane of the Halliburton's
when they went around that they do
aerial photographs I said but I bet the
connection that obtained he said what's
the connection so he helped me a few
seconds we found this water with this my
brother in when the first plane came to
Tehran and she went there as she went in
the plane with the Halliburton and he
she went around Tehran to see it so I
thought very that was a very funny
incident which happens which is good now
the word pond restart is to talk about
this transition this one important thing
which he also was explaining is that
whenever you make an institution
institution making is a very important
adventure it is very important that you
have to have think a lot before you do
something so this is what we have
inherited from this long process process
that how the world is started so the
story is as you say that His Highness
was interested in architecture because
he was responsible for building for his
community is also in his own capacity
special situation cities have iterated
influence so the autumn words was
created in 1977 it was this word a few
words of notes to protect the past and
inspire the future is not very nice
words to improve quality of life I'm
going to just stop on the word quality
but I was very surprised as I saw that
His Highness was topics using this term
in 1980 in his first speeches the first
speeches that you have for the same one
who say that the most important thing is
to how we can have an impact on the
quality of our people through
architecture and this is something which
we can look at and then it is to examine
analyze understand and influence
influence that's where if you want to
make change architects in the way
they're technicians they are what they
go to school is to learn how to do
something what you're doing and why
you're doing it for who you're going so
in having an influence on the clients
and that is one of our goals
it's not only to people who are saying
this is other people who don't
understand and especially when I'm
talking about the clients the clients
are not only the decision-makers because
you've gotten people in private sector
you've got people in government and
you've got also the users if we can one
day reach the people so this is the
famous story unfortunately many of these
photographs His Highness brought
together so he went there was a
different people who were there for
different reasons here you've got
besides Hasan Kathy who's sitting next
to his son is he came later but the
first people who were much involved were
Oleg rhobar who has been teacher of a
lot of people here bill Porter who was a
Dean of MIT so all thank wrote Bill
Porter and then there also they have
another album charts career chop HH new
so he came in now these people establish
what is changing and how you can make
sure that this system always is in this
hold kind of a dialogue between the two
groups of different groups of people and
so one of the first thing is you can
establish an award but by giving an
award we could say don't don't be like
that you are in that part of the world
you'll have all the problems someone
else in another country but the same
problems have to come with a better
solution
so this whole thing it is how you can
explain tell the stories of success
stories to others to learn and to be
able to enable themselves so doing this
thing is for disorder and don't know is
the Muslim world and by creating a
series of seminars the idea was not only
to understand the subjects so each of
the seminar that they had was
theme conservation housing identity etc
but also going to different parts of
world so who was here which I know we
talked about China that's where in China
so just what's happened is that they
made the eligible criteria first was
that any project the project already for
complete was not request which are the
drawing board so projects are being
completed completing use for one year
they have to demonstrate service to
Muslims so now what is this the second
one the first one we can understand
because you have to have enough time
there is a kind of a post occupancy you
have to know that the project exists it
works and is it has responded to the do
what the architects and the client
wanted to do in most case there are many
many cases that the projects are really
good projects but they do not work
because of shortcomings not only from
others as well
the second thing is the service to
Muslim that was the decision by the
outcome he wanted to have specific
Muslim societies Muslim societies have
been going through change 1970s 1960s
still people were there were some
countries were called Islamic countries
but there never would have used the word
Islamic architecture açelya Slavic
countries right and any of the
organizational islamic the conference
were 40-something countries that they've
got together
today if you go to Kuwait or to do by
maximum there's 65 to 60 percent 55
percent Muslims
the rest are Christians and Hindus who
are using these buildings you know this
is something we have no project which is
got to do anything with the ark I can
come to the so other thing which is very
important for the first day we are
celebrating a project and no project is
the work of an architect no architect
can say that I have done this from a
profit any architecture project is a
book is a work group of people and so
this award was the first time that we
are giving the words to project and
that's why we're bringing the Mason the
Master Mason and the architect exactly
the same level the clients all of them
all come together so this is the famous
Mason who is photograph was in nineteen
80 on the front cover of Domus and that
was a big that one photo was a big
change during years these are the
numbers that we have we but you know how
many countries we've got projects in the
projects and how many reward is given so
image we just shows that how it is worth
so at the beginning the same steering
committee they chose but they said that
we're gonna have five hundred thousand
dollars for five projects so Julie went
foot with the jury doing their
deliberations of the car that's it this
book you were in the first tree they
came and said no no we don't agree with
five projects we want to give 15 works
so hasanat income then this is a story
which is hassan unfortunately it's not
he is traveling he went he calls his
highness assess that up we have total
five projects difficult sixteen policy
and his answer was it's fine with me if
they decided 15 projects is gonna be 15
projects the reasoning that they had the
jury was that in those days it was very
new and they could not find five project
which represent the diversity of the
muslim world of those days and also the
different types of architecture now what
is very important on the historically
which was just not always expanded
impact in 1970s when i was going to
school of architecture all the artists
journals it would rarely see an article
on slow operating on engineering these
restoration and conservation
those were specialized conservation
was oncologists were operating maybe
John Turner would write one article in
AD was a very small article with nothing
all of a sudden the jury they recognized
a huge sum upgrading Protestant
components in in Indonesia they had the
water towers in Kuwait
this is infrastructure which was not
that restoration project so all of a
sudden with a very good system that
established the first award that they
went to very good PR card people they
put and it was new so it went to old
architecture and all of a sudden
architecture record review doubles
everyone they had all these projects and
they were so unusual those days because
people have not seen such grouping the
grouping is very important because
you're not coming and talking about very
something specific these projects all
together are representing architecture
and the status of the role of
architecture in our world so this later
by time it became smaller and smaller
and smaller now we've got five or six
this I think you can see so that's how
its run the world etcetera numbers are
not important Abbyson then exception
four times for four people
chairman this is to recognize one person
so the first was given to us and
thirteen and then Jeffrey power and poly
grabber these are the only four people
during the past 40 years that they've
received the Chairman's Award the
Chairman's Award does not go through the
jury it is the Chairman's the steering
can we do aside this is the structure
that those people created so it's
governed by steering committee with his
charred bodies Highness the rest with
the steering committee every two three
circles they change the people these are
the people that they're coming from
their architects their academics their
sociologists historians
and they are trying to see to set the
parameters what are what's more most the
most important issues of today that's
the role or if r7r dirty thing is they
will just work on that network of some
around 800,000 people around the world
that we call them nominators they are
the people who send us products they
nominate projects and then the student
committee chooses an independent a
situation and it is the role of the
master to me to in the projects then we
have got one other level which is the
on-site review which was introduced now
make another couple of other projects
that Awards they have it was that is one
of the main issues we've got a number of
people around sitting here that they
have been on the review team sent
someone to see the crocuses projects and
do it analysis with the project make a
report of the project we never send
someone from the same country advice and
these people make those very standard
research on the project which are very
good in just knowing the projects we say
academically also they can be some
courses but what is more important is
that those people have to come to the
jury and explain the project so I will
call it explain that's what I'm doing
and then at the end is the award office
which when I joined the award we were 25
and today
so I always use this name-dropping slide
why because when you go through these
names you can see that though ever has
was important had abroad in architecture
in the past 50 years as a member of
steering committee or member of the
Toriyama I have not put the names of the
winners etc just those people they cover
the whole architecture that this course
of the past so this award was not an
award which was created for those
countries developing countries nice
people there and we international
international discourse is one day this
is something which Peter Eisenman was
saying that Peter Eisenman's said asked
him how come you work with the new
architecture why did you go to them
and he said well I was pulled by Frank
Gehry hukou he was on the jury he called
me when he called me come this you will
learn a lot I believe in him and Frank
Gehry came because Charles Lord called
him told him you come because you learn
something this is very important when I
when you become to choosing the two
members usually I come to the most a
person it's gonna be five six days but
you will certainly learn something and
I've never had someone who's convened
complaining about that it's something to
be as I was explained that we have got
these ceremonies and seminars which
these sermons and seminars are very
important to have an impact influencing
is there Sybil was there for this 1983
Istanbul for the first time they opened
the Topkapi Palace before an event and
the president of Turkey came from Ankara
what that means that means that you
bringing architecture to that subject
becomes important
so in newspapers with architecture is
not a subject which is reported but when
these occasions comes it becomes public
it becomes goes right to the different
levels of society and also we've had it
in different places wonderful
etc so then we have also had seminars
seminars play and the early especially
in the early days they played a very
important role so because they brought
different people who are talking about
it about the subject without this was in
Cairo we're talking about expanding
metropolis and we have each of these
creatively proceedings in 1977 80s there
were no not many publications and books
about subject and the series were
published I was sent for free to all
universities with the proceedings of
these seminars have played an important
role for the people in the field so not
only we have seminars we just go around
working with other institutions the
whole thing is that you have to be
around the world there are different
different audiences and how you can have
the impact on each of them is very
important that's our role what we do
every year
also we have publications we've got 40
besides that the award books that we
published every three years we have but
also the proceeding of the seminars etc
that we do now this is something which
got 1 billion which I put up there we we
have seen the award gets a huge amount
of attention in the media celebration is
always interesting with the media I mean
it picks up but what is important it
goes it has it is a attractive story
these stories are very interesting and
BBC world they chose and they use these
films as a for programs often our each
and then these documentaries so we have
been reaching a lot of people just go
through cycle I will just put it in the
way that how it work this structure is
important how the work is so we have per
student committee people who might know
yeah these are the wise man I don't know
how wise they are but anyway and
creating those and establishing this for
each cycle those parameters one of the
main process also is that they write a
brief to do to the jury which that brief
is published in our books and that will
itself
explains the realities of our time that
was what I was talking about the
relevancy which is very important so
they choose another group which are I
came to party you're sitting here and so
these are the cycle the cycle is the
three years seventh years and it takes a
long time to do this it's not something
to do in one year because we've got the
nomination the documentation we're going
to join meetings that reviews the
shorter the housement etcetera etcetera
that is how it works the so label we
have this cycle we have 380 projects
these are 380 projects which are
eligible they've been documented we've
got enough material for them but do
remember to be able to make a short list
of 20 projects so this takes three days
of work they chose 20 projects these 20
projects were just laid around countries
they went and people go there these are
the reviewers they go and spend three
four days interviewing the architects
the clients the users other peers other
different people and they have to come
back with a report when they come back
they have to come back to the jury and
explain in the meanwhile
once the these people have finished
their work they're not honest
uncertainty anymore
we announce the shortlist twenty days
before the jury meetings the reason is
that if anyone else has got any
objection
some information additional information
which has to be given but know about it
because before when we were announcing
them there was some problem sometimes
because although someone goes there
someone else would come says I've done
this project or not we had one case
which was an interesting case
six years ago with the products in
Lebanon and documentation etc fantastic
nice and these days unfortunately with
all these computer system etc it's very
difficult to understand the reality when
when I called this so I wrote a letter
to the market they say your project in
shortest so I called it friend in a UV
and I said by the way so each project so
anyway he went there in so there's
nothing this Jasmine caused me first no
first I received through all my lebanese
friends which project the project was up
in there at all so he called me and said
iris to you if by tomorrow at 12 o'clock
we don't put my project amongst the
projects as well I will sue you I'm
sorry you're suing who where on what
basis so in order to that was the reason
because the project was not there so we
not did not included at the end so we've
got this timing for the public also to
tell us then we have the jury members
they come and sits together now what is
very important this is
yo or if we have examining her I was
interesting
discuss the issues with you and your
neighbors and all the people secondly
there's so many people who offer but
this is people who are working for this
one project they come commendation
again it's ceremony afterwards each of
these countries and it's just continues
that we just go there this is like this
is school so not only the people who
came to see this in Dhaka we're present
during the ceremony the next day
whenever that they all came and visited
so the project has been in the school
they get become volunteers to work in
that school
interesting now now I'm going to go
through those projects one by one these
six projects were modern because we've
had so sometimes there's this tendency
that sometimes the parties are always
nice projects so I always want to try
something find something this much more
provocative anyway so we've got the six
parties this is a project building in
Senegal in Senegal there are these
schools that they want to make them in
the intermediate cities which instead of
having all the people going to capital
so the University University which is in
a city far from the capital but they had
to build some classrooms and here with a
very ingenious way it's only introducing
these forms to make those bricks they
have been trying to cover the whole
building on one side with the shadow and
the other side it's all covered with
this space and also with this area that
they're catching all the water is a very
sustainable so this project is very
important they say that although that
means the inside and the interiors as
you can see we can see few air
conditioning but in fact it works very
well they say something like five
degrees or more difference between these
excursion - so they use it of
you can see that space so I find this
product extreme importantly in number of
reasons it is the way the process of
this project but the new capital was
created people moved and so
with these cities of this world if there
are immigrants when you walk there some
kind of funny we see all the is ads on
the wall it's written in Hindi or in
English in Arabic so because that's how
they move so with the vision of one
person who she was Minister of Culture
she started a series of restoration
works as a initiative person initiative
and she went through very difficult
times as well within her own country
once Nasser and I were there to give a
talk so we went there we saw there was
no one because that day she was sacked
from the Ministry Minister again she
became a minister but she's so forceful
that the change of ministry into
directors so she would not pretend the
minute haven't of the minister but what
is important here is that not only they
started to be happy things do not afraid
at all she was not to become I say this
conventional way
but themselves one of the important
things that they did was that to create
this is there's a calendar they called
the bird rooms it means from one end of
the island and they made a way to first
of all see this change public space in
historic cities did not have did not
exist sometimes it was the end of year
they created 16 small plots as Gardens
public spaces introducing these lamps
that you can see just look like a curve
very modern where strike you can when
you walk you will get given that this
rose you can just go around from one
they have created with is a very
concrete way it has become me department
the City slice
it's kind of small so you not understand
and that's the reason don't think
we have to go and look at the books for
example this community can see on the
right this was done as a pavilion was
built for the expo it was dismantled and
put on one plot and it works now for
example people there were two families
who were performing music in the
neighborhood so they've created these
spaces performing it closes concerts
they open it up and become a puppet
space around the other product for me
this is the first time that we've come
in word from you mean UAE is something
which you've discussed a lot what it
means in architecture how it's been done
and it's been done all by others for the
first time this is the two architects
within this project are the first
graduates is they are the Emirati
graduates of the school of architecture
in the charger so that for me was very
important to give this message that it's
not only those people coming from
outside especially in that area but they
only see the importance of the people
being graduate to do the people who've
been for a foreign companies working but
the product has been another important
thing it was a piece of this area became
waste
it's wasteland which made to become the
better it was all the thing report so
they cleaned it up itself making a
decision rule of decision was instead of
taking they could have made it into a
shopping mall because it's a very prime
land they made it into this big lake and
they had asked this architect to do this
interpretation so well all the children
it is so they have architect we decided
to come outside the only good course
inside it's got a very small
architectural trick that we play by
tilting these these windows so because
they are tilted the birds who are in the
cages outside they do not see the
children because it's a mirror but from
the children from inside can see them
so they've created this relationship
between the children and the environment
which is very and this lake around the
lake there's a number of spots that
people can go and watch the first minute
now but in the past few years the
migrant birds were going from Africa to
Siberia they will not stop it yet now
this started stopping well
these are the same by convergence which
mean after after the charge etc gold
from Syria to go back and because of the
fight an airline they have changers
their their path
interesting so this is how the other
project is that project which we
probably seen the Palestinian Museum the
Palestinian Museum is done by music
University to them don't forget that
this museum is a museum is a very
political action as well it was
supported by people from outside and
there are not that many objects in
museum it's not a usual museum with
objects it's got a series of spaces to
to present different exhibitions but the
landscaping here places extremely
important because they can have this
cascade
they brought all the plants of Palestine
so all the species which exist in
Palestine were studied and they are used
in this landscape so this is the whole
thing to remember this is something and
that was the important message they're
actually just products these are the
same architects who they are doing the
grant they were trying to have the same
cloudy system and if you haven't it's a
very interesting traveling system that
they found very good contractor to do
that and the coyote wouldn't let them do
it this other project which is business
only was scale and influence and
happiness in the course of five years in
Tatarstan but a program that people do
it was coming from the president's
program they have created 380 parks
rehabilitated or created these parts the
whole things started with the story the
story that you can see these two photos
there was a famous freedom
so they were asking was started in so
that conversation how you can change the
mindset of these ex-soviet understand it
is for their benefit with very small
amount of investment they have something
in this in the city which will help them
to become VC more productive also they
have created work for small companies
were making these sweets furnitures etc
so these public areas are extremely
when use having in mind that only five
five four months a year
it can be used as is because the rest of
the years under snow so you have to
create this part
the last project is a floating school
now
usually to have an experiment it's all
done by young people who they have no
reputation they take the risk they do
something which is here Architects urban
age took a high risk the studio is not
very interesting maybe with a teacher in
London for many years
Bangladeshi she people she brings all
the her pension funds and she wanted to
create the schooling in Dhaka near Dhaka
she goes to buy the land and then course
is her nephew which is the architect to
build a school when he comes back it's
during the flood season they can see
that there's no Lana it's only but they
say what should we do say well we have
to build here because I hope is laughs
and that's it so this challenge becomes
for the architect but how to build use
the knife which another is it is every
year for the three four months the water
rises up to three meters and go down so
he comes with creating this spool which
is you can see you
this school which we just got six
elements as you can see there so the
water comes all the way and it looks
this river that is very usual in
Bangladesh so he uses a very simple
technique the technique is put these
tires just use tires so the whole thing
sits on the units but each of the units
are separate from Delhi so they can
float and what he did also which was
very important what he did was he also
had to use the toilets so he had a very
simple but sophisticated way to create
through the septic tank with the toilet
with that also elements also can float
and so it was a very very interesting
project and as I say high risk for
someone who already was the famous
architect and if his failure now we've
got these two books which he came down
first it wasn't in Russian then we touch
and it translate into English two months
so here it says for the library there
are two copies of it so every year we
try to make the filter at least at the
same time if you're interested we have
got one thing the best way of
communicating because useful books
images and such a they don't learn
because it is only with them
the medium of film that you can
understand the space and people so what
we do every year we send the number of
people the filmmakers that on all the 20
projects will be shortlisted there two
and a half minutes of fearless films
with their own YouTube channels
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
I will start by actually asking the
audience if you have any questions so
visualizing is becomes
what extent do you think that
organization that you know sometimes the
group of people's money to something and
subjectivity is something important in
architecture but you have quality nicely
except in how you bring different people
from the community and how do you
separate yourself which is very
interesting is that the day after the
ceremony we have that seminar with that
seminar gives an occasion for people to
discuss and ask questions where we have
got this jury members district committee
members and the winners were there so
that is kind of the critical official
critical part the rest is that what's
important if we are capable of making
people ask questions that is visible
because it that because the whole thing
would not finish it would be continuous
discussion about the party we have still
have that sometimes product with won an
award like two three cycles ago and
still questions about the
bringing two new elements because you
can see there's nothing which is paying
for any updated project has to be seen
time as well because it has if it acts
differently during the time certain
projects by nature they're static they
don't change you know let's say Museum
always fortunately some other projects
especially social projects they do
before they change sometimes for the
better sometimes for the worse
[Music]
to
so we're not responding but one health
as I said in the context all these
things with the drink people without
mind remember sitting around table and
there are certain period of time
so some of these energies for example
today climate changes importance so we
can see that in a series of these
projects you've got climate change
addressed not only but parks this
university see what will he look at them
climate change so you can take one can
look at you can see the system works
yeah I would follow on from esta and
since I was mentioned in the beginning
for them first of all I want to thank
for everyone involved for this cycle
story but what I'm noticing the earlier
cycles there was this journalism there
was a lot of different things off is
powered by a so-called film and it was
all over the place and that pluralism
also went hand in hand I think sort of
reluctance to go over it sense whereas
now and see is that there is this more
focusing or coherence around these
issues which I can sum up as social
concern sustainability public space you
know all of these as matters that are
bringing the awards we need to the
larger discourse of architecture rather
[Music]
this is all before that would never have
the shortness so today as we are
packaging 20 projects and out of these
25 six are the winners so look at all
the parties some other ones in the
shortest do complement this approach to
diversity but sometimes I mean we've had
projects all the cycles we're addressing
a lot of issues like technology I would
have loved to happen in the middle maybe
a sky scraper but at the same time when
the projects come to the jury it could
not find something exceptional because
what is important with the words is to
give something which it goes is this
exceptional
so in regards to the bouts of turbulence
or political of people going on in
certain countries and not so much as to
how that kind of shapes what the
steering committee is looking for but
I'm more curious as to like for example
the in the first cycle the renovation of
Hajj to finish and be called who and
Jerusalem how that kind of what the
government's tape on that is if that
makes sense
like how is one if it doesn't limit are
certain projects not able to make it to
the nomination or the board because yet
the government in affliction
and it's that's why the it comes they're
all there
there's no reason that projects are not
there but for example that you mentioned
the world changes right now in the old
business in 1980s conservation was seen
as objects at all the subject years
actually I was in in Cairo Nasser and
the project remembered the project which
is done by the Germans in tradition it's
five buildings but doing the five
buildings together it became this it was
not as conservation so that is
interesting that how with the time these
projects the change and the way that
people appreciate them is changing
because the conservation today nobody
looks at and a bit competitive because
that project that he's speaking about
was called that enemies which actually
means the crimson anyway and then they
are an organization took over double
right so with all of these questions and
comments perhaps we'll start with you
good
agree with see bad gas
in a way this new community that seems
to be created by making architectures
and issues environmental matters that
way I wonder if that might mean that the
projects in the future become because in
a way therefore certain projects will
not be be nominated because it will be
understood
the architecture with a message which I
totally admitted that its importance but
being a commentator I should also raise
some questions about the implications
for the future especially because the
award has clearly moved away from its
initial criteria so it seems almost that
we understood is that our anti monuments
or in fact architect kind of behind it
although that's not the starting point
kind of I was more involved in the
previous work and there too I sensitive
and it's me also part of a broader trend
among schools of architecture like the
GSD for example where so architecture
seems to have like an every conceptual
art or in some way from history from
what it means that the project would be
maybe fifty years to raise what wins the
place of history what are the criteria
of design quality once you determine
that the project has a very good message
and a very good role to play
[Laughter]
technique you mentioned in the joke into
the kid yeah so coming to say that we
actually used these volumes and as an
example when a last semester seminar was
meeting right the time of the award and
being at the award we said the jury
identified 20 shortlist it selected six
charged to the class was the jury failed
to find him
which one's was it and so during the
meetings that we had over there the
class the seminar was going over the 16
other 15 others and then he did tell the
shortlisted projects you know you were
selected but help students to actually
go through the process that the jury did
to ask what should be premiered it what
should be appraised other than that
intellectual process is extraordinarily
creative and productive just this
morning also a the other senator we said
where do you look for outstanding
projects in orefield architecture
Environmental Design broadly is very
poorly indexed so if yours using
searches and libraries and architectural
historians and scientists and engineers
have superb libraries indexing ideas are
outstanding
really poorly indexed video this is one
index that they can go to arcs net get
all the materials background materials
as well as now a corpus of projects they
are worthy close study so it's become an
extraordinary resource another question
I have for you really is that the
quality of life I was so glad to see
that was mentioned at the very beginning
if you go through almost and yet the
archive development network when they
visited last year we had this great
conversation well how do you assess the
impact of the built environment projects
they said well very we have trouble with
that we don't know how to evaluate
architectural interventions and
conversely architectural discourse you
don't see the elaboration with the rigor
in socio-economic cultural political
terms it seems like there's an enormous
opportunity to you as a query for future
Awards that there's an extraordinary
frontier
so the other part that you're not going
to answer is well it's a little bit of
comments and I would like to perhaps
address the questions that were asking
about the political or the message
aspect of the award and this is more of
sort of like witnessing the development
of the award in the last 35 years than
just this final cycle one thing that one
notices about how the award is
structured is that in and by itself is
trying to mitigate the political and
diplomatic aspect of the fact that it's
an award established by the other hand
who has a political position in the
world and a mission in the world and the
fact that it is stratified and that
there is a steering committee and a jury
any technical reviewer means that the
subjectivity that we talked about is
again mitigated by the fact that there
are so many players are so many levels
that deciding ultimately which project
is going to be awarded so one recognizes
the fact that exactly as an CML and
ultimately guru was asking about if
there is political motivation in the
directionality of the award and if that
is articulated it seems to me that it is
not really articulated and the
subjectivity is lessened by the fact
that there are so many actors and that
have so many functions within other
things ultimately reaching the list of
the projects to be awarded but there is
the factor of time what we have now is
50 years of experience and 50 years of
maturity of an award that is now not
really shine away from somehow revealing
interests that ultimately need to
motivate architecture outside of the
canonical celebration of architecture as
object I mean the comparison between the
world and other prestigious and heavily
paid of words immediately shows that the
monument is celebrated by the likes of
the RIBA and the Pritzker and the
celebration of the individual genius
whereas the elephant world is again
meditating against that and to me this
is a very important role that the award
is playing first of all the architect is
not made into a demigod India from the
world and no if the architects like that
or not but that's the reality
and it should somehow accept it and that
they should start seeing themselves as
team players that there are a lot of
people that are involved in it the
patrons the builders and so on and the
second thing is the scenes that have
been noted these are actually political
themes ultimately not political in the
level that Simon and I would like to see
and probably that would be impossible
given the fact that the other hand is a
political actor in the world so there
has to be some sort of the limit in
there but addressing environmental
change
at present scarcity of material
addressing flood in a country that loses
so many people every year and that
should be I mean going back even in in
the selection of religious buildings
selecting religious buildings that
wouldn't be celebrated otherwise there
used to be this very famous mosque in
Pakistan that so many people objected to
it and I felt that was actually a
beautiful message to say why are you
objecting to it this is what the
monument is for the people that were
building it so to me despite the fact
that I probably share the critique of
Ezra and of civil but I find
a world within the world to have done
the best thing that they could have done
given the limitations of who is
sponsoring it what is the relationship
of the patron to the rest of the world
and as matter of fact actually how is
the architectural profession itself
reacting to an award that is saying I am
going to celebrate a part of the world
that you usually overlooked and usually
do not include and pushing towards that
inclusion has been one of the major
achievements your nomination process was
people send projects because there were
less information today you just google
anything anything comes up in a way so
some people also over nominators they
say they tend not to send projects
because they say well someone else will
send it so we as an artist we are we
have to be at the same time go active I
think I don't want to ourselves to be
looking for projects so what they have
done as a process to to make sure that
we heard everything besides the people
nominate the project we ourselves we've
identified projects and then they'll
probably have identified and we make
sure that we've got in all categories
then we send those projects to the
nominators in the field and we ask them
if they would endorse promotes do not
automatically do quality in there so
that's why we're trying to make sure
that the jury when did you see that
three hundred four hundred projects
these people are the projects are
somehow comprehensible as I said we have
got so many things because you know it's
important to have what this range
Houghton is what are the ones which are
innovative innovation is very important
and that is something because certain
things are done and repeated be
especially big a special project they're
the same thing there's nothing new about
the one thing is how you can find a
story with
oh geez and that is what makes it
different and that makes it that people
pay more attention to it now having said
that in the past every cycle people come
to us we've seen projects through the
award that we have never seen it in
other contexts that's come to attention
and that is something that I think it's
a force of the world it's the force of
the word that is the way that we are
connecting in the networks of this
creator which is not the same network
speed yeah what has got a difference
with others because academics they've
got their own connections
they've read the same practicing
architects networks and then you've got
students who see things differently as
well and then you've got the
international musicians because they are
a game when you go to the polls so we
have been able to go concept which is
which I think has helped us able to
very small mission so and we try hard to
do only what we have to do do it
correctly initiative and then take it
around and make this the more discussion
we can make are there any burning
questions
I like the burning there's one yes I
think it's fantastic and I agree with
everything you've said that's one thing
in there it's all about it's very
constructive but there is so much so
much key structure going on you know
think about Syria real towns communities
how does the organization behind these
are not the solution famous architect
publication so a famous architect
project the way that they were plan they
did not work at all so we can see that
sometimes and that is our job
it was thinking to reviewed it was
published to the project but the product
did not mean because the post is a post
the post-disaster project whatever you
call them for us is very important but
they haven't found a good example what
we found was the famous artists who did
it and at the end but anyway if these
projects exist but we only look at them
afterwards is there if you know any of
them please see one of my pieces if you
know any projects that you think will be
considered this Center this one thing I
wanna add is
we also as an institution take risks in
[Music]
1995 we received a nomination from the
nominator only the reforestation so
every first station is an architecture
project so first of the first act is
that take to visit are we going to
present this to you or not because
technically is it a project based on
project so our decision was that we will
present it to the jury the reforestation
and see how they can consider the winner
by creating these areas you can contain
spaces but also having an impact on the
way the day whether the cities are
working etc so it is these are the areas
that we really would like people that if
they see anything that they think that
this can also be considered architecture
to present it to us because that is how
I'm very happy with this parks project
questions well before we let you go
you've seen that beautiful posters we
have many copies of it those of you who
have access to boards or places where
you can hand them we have many of them
here please come and take as many as you
wish and if you like our activities the
next is on March 16 it's going to be on
modern architecture in Keio a former
student of our program who went on
indeed a PhD at NYU and now is the
foremost authority on modern
architecture of Cairo just published a
book on the topic is going to come to
speak about it on March 16 same time
same place
Mohammed Shah it this is named so I hope
to see as many of you as possible and
thank you for being here today and
please come and take a poster if you
want at least for the picture
[Applause]
