okay so I'm testing yet so welcome
everybody this is the first lecture of
the architecture department spring
lecture series
I'm McCall son I'm a second-year PhD
student in the design and computation
group and I'll just introduce our
session this evening this session is
hosted by the designing computation
group and it's such it constitutes the
fourth session in our lecture series
under the title computational mediations
before I introduce our speaker this
evening I will just say a couple of
words about the series which this year
is curated by PhD candidate Theodora VAR
Dooley in collaboration with Professor
Terry Knight our theme this year
computational mediations is selected to
probe new modalities in action agency
and expression that may emerge in the
confluence between human intentionality
and the properties of computational
technologies in this mode of
investigation some of the questions that
works were exploring include what what
how does computation inflect processes
of design and making what is the role of
the sign and of designers in instituting
new forms of human technology
relationships and also can mediation
itself become a locus of design this
evening we have the immense pleasure of
welcoming Fred Turner whose work on
media and cultural relationships
continues to provide provocative
insights into our topic of this series
Media and agency in particular Fred
Turner is a cultural historian he's a
professor and chair of the Department of
Communication at Stanford University
where his work explores media technology
and American cultural history with a
specific emphasis on how emerging
technologies and media have shaped
American life since the second world war
he is the author of three books the
award-winning from counterculture to
cyber culture Stuart brand the whole
earth Network
the rights of digital utopianism from
2006 echoes of combat the Vietnam War in
American memory from 1996 and most
recently the Democratic surround
multimedia and American liberalism from
the world from World War 2 to the
psychedelic sixties published in 2013
Fred Turner earned his PhD in
communication from the University of
California at San Diego a BA in American
and English literature from Brown
University and he holds an MA in English
from Columbia University before joining
the faculty at Stanford Fred Turner
taught at the Harvard University's John
F Kennedy School of Government as well
as here at MIT at Sloan School of
Management as well as the Institute for
foreign languages and literature in
addition to a prolific career in
academia Fred Turner has also worked as
a freelance journalist for more than a
decade so please join me in welcoming
Fred Turner thank you thank you very
much
I like this crowd already so it's a
little toasty here tonight do you mind
if I take the jacket off thank you
all right California style you know
every time I come east I have this
horrible confusion about you know do I
do I pack a suit do i I don't know okay
it's a real treat for me to be here
tonight this is in many ways home
territory for me
you know I was born about a mile down
the river I grew up in the nearby and I
worked as a very modest freelance
journalist for a long time we've gone
dark can we bring those back up a little
bit please more light thank you oh okay
all right in the back if you get sleepy
raise your hand okay thank you great
thank you very much that's great
and I'm absolutely delighted to be back
here I'm particularly delighted because
much of the story that I'm going to tell
has its origins literally in this
building I think we are sitting in the
middle of one of the most important
engines of cultural change in America
over the last 75 years and I want to
tell you a little bit about that engine
tonight
I'm gonna give a talk that should walk
through about three pieces I'd like to
talk for about 45 minutes straight if
you have questions of fact please just
jump right in raise your hand I'll call
you on on you if you have conceptual
questions if you could hold them to the
end that would be great we'll have lots
of time for for Q&A I'm gonna start with
Facebook and I'm gonna argue that
Facebook poses a particular set of
historical problems for American
cultural historians and also for
analysts of digital media digital media
technology I sort of give to you in a
nutshell now Facebook offers us a world
in which connecting with one another
through a commercial institutional space
is presented as something that is a
democratic good our interpersonal
relations connecting to one another
through devices through commerce is
supposed to be a good how on earth did
we come to believe that was true okay
that's the core question there the
answer turns out to lie in a place that
I would never have guessed when I
started this book and I'll say more
about how I got to it it actually seems
to lie in world war two and in a turn
against mass media mass society top-down
systems of all kinds seeming to be
fascist at the time as many thought they
were that turn led to a widespread
belief among American elites
particularly here at MIT that multimedia
environments environments with screens
all around us sounds coming from all
sides would in fact free us to
experience democratic modes of
perception modes of perception based on
choice integration of experience
tonight's talk that's the theme of my
book the Democratic surround and I'll go
into that in some depth but tonight's
talk is to aim to do to tell you that
story that origin story and then to
argue about how computers got attached
to that story there's a fantasy of
multimedia that emerges during World War
two to which computers were quite
self-consciously attached first by
Norbert Wiener here in the late 40s and
early 50s and then later by a group of
counterculture based artists and
engineers from Bell Labs in the 1970s it
will tell that story too there's gotta
be a lot of history coming at you bear
with me be patient
that's where we're headed and yeah let's
get underway
so we inhabit a world in which we are
surrounded by screens I have a screen in
my pocket we're actually doing my bag
now so it doesn't ring we have laptops
we have screens in the backs of all the
seats on the airplane that I flew to get
here we have screens in the backs of our
SUV seats screens surround us and as
they surround us they work a lot like
Facebook they are offered to us by a
wide variety of corporations as devices
for interpersonal connection and the
fantasy of interpersonal connection is
not only that we will become more
intimate with one another but that we
will build a new kind of polity by quote
connecting to one another we will be
both independent agents of our own
satisfaction seeking others that we want
to be connected to and will be part of a
sort of connected independent polity of
individuals doing this seeking the
seeking is managed not by the state but
by a corporation based in Menlo Park
California Facebook the images that we
create for our Facebook are in turn
conditioned by the images that we
encounter in the commercial sphere we're
being offered I want to argue a kind of
technology enabled commercially enabled
mode of democratic politics that is in
fact not democratic in any fundamental
sense at all but is rather a mode of
management of surveillance and I want to
see just exactly how we got there that's
our goal today so a bit of background
well thank you for that very kind
introduction
that was that was great so I went back
to it to grad school oh I don't know how
many years ago was it I don't about 20
years ago now eek um and since that time
since about 2002 when I got my PhD I've
been trying to do a kind of two things
I've been trying to tell a story of
American cultural history after World
War 2 that takes media technology very
seriously if you ask are there any
America are there any card-carrying
American Historians in the room
excellent
all right good then I can say this thing
without fear I know this will go on the
web but you know whatever
when you talk to a 2008 of American 20th
century culture and you ask them what's
really important most of them will get
all misty-eyed and say Roosevelt because
American history of the 20th century
like much American history tends to be a
history of political leaders and the
social forces that they managed that
boggles my mind when I think about the
20th century I think about the rise of
radio television recorded music cinema
the internet those things are so
antithetical to the study of American
history as traditionally practiced that
they've actually migrated to their own
Association the Society for the history
of Technology the American Historical
Association has no space for media
history as such okay so goal one is to
return media to the center of American
cultural history goal two is to his
store a size Media Studies I don't know
what it's like here so much anymore at
Stanford most of my friends who think
hard about media media technology think
about it in a sort of three year window
they're completely wedded to the product
development cycle right what's what's
gonna happen to the iPhone in version
seven right you know is Steve Jobs gonna
launch uber of his own uber you know I
mean whatever from that place it's very
hard to think about how the the
large-scale claims for social change
that are emerging in the tech world have
historical roots let alone to challenge
them and so my goal is to do historical
work that provides a groundwork a
groundwork a basis for rethinking the
technologies that are emerging around us
and the kinds of politics they promised
so that's my goal and I've written these
two odd books the first was a book
called from counterculture to cyber
culture which started as my dissertation
I was working on a part of it while I
was teaching it Sloan and just four
graduate students in the room I want to
offer some encouragement that book
changed my life but before it changed my
life it was an obsessive strange project
conducted in a back room inside another
back room in the Sloan School and you
know I was working on that book around
2000 and I thought I'd killed my career
I just want I want sentence for the grad
school
in the room I was working on hippies
while the rest of my field was working
on the internet it all worked out okay
so I just want to say that to the grad
students in the room so this is a story
of how countercultural ideals of the
good society from the late 1960s
migrated into the tech world of the 80's
and 90's thanks largely to the effort of
Stewart Brand and his cohort some of
whom you'll know you'll know
Tim O'Reilly you'll know Howard
Rheingold Kevin Kelley the wired crew
they all appear watching tomorrow it
doesn't appear but the others all appear
in this book and it's a track it's it's
er attracts a network of people who come
together in the 60s and stay together
for 30 years and when they do they bring
us terms like personal computer
electronic frontier virtual community
they really revamp our understanding of
what the internet and the web can be in
terms set by their own sixties
countercultural experience so I finished
that book came out that was good um
wanted to get underway with another book
and I was struck with the paradox I had
always been told that the 1960s were a
clean hard multi-colored break with this
sort of dull black-and-white McCarthy a
1940s 1950s I'd always been told that
the Cold War was a kind of
black-and-white locked-down time imagine
my surprise when in the course of
researching that book I found that the
hippies I was studying notably Stuart
brand but all of his circle really can
Kesey many others were actually reading
the core literature of the 1940s and 50s
for inspiration they were reading Erik
Frome they were reading Karen horney
they were reading Gordon Allport a
psychologist employed at Harvard led
some studies with the Boston police here
and so what I started doing was just
following those networks back just
reading what they were reading and then
seeing how those folks tied together in
the past and that led me over a period
of years to the book I'll be talking
about tonight the Democratic surround in
many ways the Democratic surround is a
prequel to from counterculture to cyber
culture so far so good everybody's
hearing me okay excellent all right so
let's go back in let me take you now to
the late 1930s until the 1930s
American intellectuals tended to believe
that the leading source of high culture
on this planet was Germany not France
Germany and don't nevermind World War
one despite World War one this was the
country that had brought us you know
Beethoven it brought us philosophy
heinrich heine the poet it had brought
us high culture of the highest kinds it
was still the home in the 1930s of some
of the very best academies in the world
so when Hitler comes to power American
intellectuals politicians journalists
have a problem how can they explain the
fact that the most literate nation on
earth from their perspective has
suddenly turned itself over to this
wacky mustachioed former clerk Adolf
Hitler now today I think we could say
that a lot of the answer has to do with
the chaos of Aimar Germany economic
collapse the search for strong
leadership out of such a chaotic
situation but at the time that
explanation was actually relatively sort
of a minority explanation a much more
common explanation was simply that
Hitler had mastered the mass media
Hitler had somehow found a way mostly
through radio but also through film and
the print press to unmanned the reason
of German citizens to disabled the
reason of German citizens to stir up
their unconscious now remember this is
in the 30s the unconscious is still a
very new idea Freud only had only come
to the US very recently stir up their
unconsciousness stop them from thinking
and cause them to bind their affections
in a single upward direction there were
two theories of how this worked the
first theory this is one of my favs
that's why hermann goering is here doing
his fascist pose the first theory was
that Hitler in his circle were literally
clinically insane and that they were
able to transmit their interior
psychological madness to large
populations through the media media was
literally a vehicle for conveying their
madness I know it sounds a little wacky
to us today but this is a sincere belief
it was published in the New York Times
many other reputable outlets and that's
one vision the other vision is in the
nature of mass media themselves and I
wanted you to see
this image from the rural
electrification administration in the US
because I think it conveys this second
idea you can see these rays coming in
and they're meant to show that now
finally radio can reach the most rural
houses in America but I think they also
show just how powerful people thought
the Rays of radio were they believed
many Americans and many others believed
that the one-to-many situation that mass
media require was itself a theatrical
practice of the fascist situation that
the mass media asked you to turn your
attentions toward a single point even a
distant point in Washington or in
Germany and melt yourself into an
imagined mass attune to and ultimately
perhaps obedient to such distant figures
now this is not just a German problem in
the 30s I was completely surprised when
I went back and started reading old
issues of The Saturday Evening Post and
other magazines from the 30s to see
Franklin Roosevelt called the fourth
fascist
this is especially shocking if you've
grown up as I have around historians of
the 20th century who worship Roosevelt's
no he tuple issues here tonight
roosevelt was was was laid up alongside
Tojo Mussolini and Hitler why because he
too seemed to have mastered the mass
media and to through his fireside chats
to be reaching down into the homes of
Americans where they lived emotionally
grabbing their emotions and turning them
toward the service of his own efforts to
centralize and massif I the American
state in the national reconstruction
administration people were just terribly
afraid that mass media and even in the
hands of a relatively benevolent leader
could be the gateway to fascism nor were
their concerns without context something
that I think many of us have forgotten
certainly I never knew was how viable
fascism was as a political option in the
United States and in England before the
war these are British fascists circa
1938 in Devon England but there were
fascists all through the United
States you may remember father Coughlin
father Coughlin was a right-wing
preacher not unlike Donald Trump went on
the air was Catholic he went on the air
once a week he had an audience of 3
million he prote he preached in favor of
the protocols of the Elders of Zion and
which is a famous pro-nazi tract
advocated Nazi ideals a Gallup poll
suggested that 68% of his weekly
listeners agreed with his views 1939
Madison Square Garden in the heart of
Jewish New York 22,000 Americans 22,000
rallied on behalf of fascism
they hung banners from Madison Square
Garden saying stop Jewish domination of
Christian America and they put people in
brown shirt uniforms on the front stage
before banners of the American flag and
George Washington there's a picture of
this in the in the book Democratic
surround worse after Hitler went into
Poland after Hitler went into Poland a
thousand Americans marched down East
86th Street carrying
swastikas and American flags wearing
fake Nazi uniforms and they were not
booed they were not booed it was a
picture that in the book two crowds
lined the street and they did not boo
them chances aren't you know Humphrey
Bogart what movies do you know that
Humphrey Bogart has been in just shout
them out Casablanca great help me Bob
help me here Mario get him out way
ballsy's Falken big sleep keep going
treasure yet treasures here Madre great
okay my guess is that you like me have
never had never seen until I saw this in
the middle of the night a film called
the Black Legion the Black Legion was a
1937 Humphrey Bogart film in which he
played a black shirt 'add American
fascist
who killed his Polish neighbor he and
his black shirt team hoped to foment a
fascist revolution in the u.s. let's
just say that movie doesn't get as much
play as Casablanca does okay I haven't I
had no idea I thought by Miller Lite
couldn't sleep caught it on TV was had
my mind blown you know in the immortal
words of sink
Louis there was a fear in the US that it
really can happen here so I want to set
the stage before I go into the
multimedia stuff just by again repeating
the fear here is that mass media
one-to-many media create fascists either
by engaging individuals with mad leaders
or simply by putting us all in crowds
pointing in the same direction so world
war 2 gets underway and this poses a
problem for American leaders and
American leaders at this time includes
political leaders but also intellectuals
social scientists if we want to engage
in confronting fascism and we want to go
to war how are we going to get our own
citizens to confront fascism in a way
that doesn't turn them into fascists so
there's a circle in Roosevelt's crowd
that says don't worry about it gurbles
is doing an incredibly good job
we need to imitate his methods and
deprogram the people later ok that's
yeah I wish I were kidding
that's almost verbatim there was another
group however that had a very different
view and they actually ended up having a
lot of influence they are long forgotten
but very important group of
intellectuals called the committee for
national morale they formed together in
1941 they were led by an art historian
named Arthur up on Pope our historians
in the room you too can lead political
movements ok and time has a chuckle but
back then it was not he brought together
60 of America's leading social
scientists anthropologists people like
Margaret Mead Gregory Bateson Gordon
Allport from Harvard he gathered them
together and tasked them with figuring
out how to build an American mode of
morale that would preserve American
individuality but at the same time allow
us to be unified in our confrontation
with fascism he had two ideas that are
really important a first idea in this
crowd is the idea of democratic
character in this period much of
American social science was preoccupied
with the idea brought to us by Franz
boas the anthropologist the different
nations have different character styles
and that whether child-rearing or media
they tended to invoke those styles and
reproduce them and that's what gave
cultures their coherent
so one theory here is that mass media
triggered the authoritarian personality
style of Nazi Germany reinforced it and
triggered it how would we get media that
would produce Democratic character
Allport wrote something in 1942 that I
think gives us an insight into how they
hope to do this this is just a passage
from an essay he wrote the nature of
democratic morale and there are two
pieces two words here that I want to
really flag for you as key the first
word is personality in a democracy you
resist fascism by strengthening
something inside yourself it's your
personality something inside you
individually must be strengthened and
once it's strengthened it needs to be
brought together with others not on the
basis of top-down ordering systems not
on the basis of hierarchy or bureaucracy
but rather on principles of voluntary
coordination Facebook sorry you see
where I'm going here okay this is an
effort to liberate Americans from the
threat of fascism but we're opening a
door to something that we I think know
now as something different okay so here
we are in New York this is 1942 groups
are working together for about two years
they're writing white papers they're
publishing books they're very visible
they're advising Roosevelt and they are
the opposition to the sort of pro
gurbles faction inside Roosevelt's group
they theorize that in order to
coordinate the intelligences and wills
of people what they need to do is design
a medium built on non hierarchical
principles now what's that going to look
like they have lots of different ideas
but basically they are all oriented
around putting images sounds smoke bombs
okay what kind of wacky around people so
that they could gather up some idea of
what America meant for themselves they
had theories but they're all writers
they really don't know how to make media
lucky for them they were right down the
street from a group of refugee Bauhaus
artists who had moved to New York in
1937 so Walter Gropius is part of this
crowd but the
the figure who and as well as his lászló
moholy-nagy and yogi Kepesh who later
came here to MIT they're all part of
this crowd but the figure who matters
most for our story tonight is Herbert
Beier Herbert Beier was the inventor of
the all lowercase type that many of us
still use from the Bauhaus he's a
typographer designer museum exhibition
designer he also went on parenthetically
to help create Aspen as the place where
we have the Aspen Institute created as a
sort of intellectual center later in
life in the early 1930s he came up with
a new theory of exhibitions that had an
enormous impact on American culture and
American media today in our own time
right how you hang paintings just
doesn't seem like a massively important
political project ok just it's like yeah
okay so you hung him over the ceiling
big deal right in his time it matters
enormous ly it matters in two different
ways the first thing to know is that
when he starts designing museum
exhibitions traditional museums are
doing this picture ilvl individual
encounter absorbed picture eye level
individual counter absorbed you were
meant to go sort of around the wall
there are exceptions to this we can talk
about Russian constructivism surrealism
the salons of ancient France mean we can
go deep on the differences but the world
that he's pushing back on is a world in
which individual images are hung at eye
level in a line around a room what he
says is that's not how people work he's
not a Freudian he's a gestalt issed
he believes that what we need to do to
become whole people is to see things
around ourselves knit them together into
our individual personalities in a way
that is individual to us and strengthen
ourselves in the 1930s in order to
resist the predations of Aimar Germany
when he comes to the US he needs a job
very badly okay and he's more than happy
to take the multimedia theory of display
that he's developed in Europe and
repurpose it now he's going to help
produce not just the new man of Germany
in the early 30s which is what he was
aiming for but instead the Democratic
man of the United States sufficiently
strong inside himself in usual
with him himself to push back against
the Nazi regime the first place buyer
saw his designs implemented was the
Museum of Modern Art this is 1942 this
is an exhibition called the road to
victory
it was a huge smash was up for about
eight weeks 80,000 people came which is
a lot of people for the Museum of Modern
Art in 1942 and it was designed by
Herbert Beier and Edward Steichen who
would later go on to do the family of
man very much on the same design lines
you can see here things that to our
modern I might really be disgruntled
right these are large Native Americans
referred to as red men you know but you
can also see if the images are very
large they come in all sizes they're
weirdly colliding so this is a farmer
war they asked for it now by God they'll
get it here's Tojo giggling about Pearl
Harbor clear strong propagandistic
intent but what was interesting to me at
least is that it's not the strong
propaganda images that make the make the
exhibition so popular it's the way
they're hung people write in newspapers
about the show all the time and what
they say is you know this show suddenly
allows us to experience the freedom of
being an American and they're talking
about this thing this is the actual road
that you walk through this is a model of
the exhibition to us we might feel very
manipulated walking through that line
but audiences at the time felt enormous
ly free they could move they could
congregate they could put together
meaning out of images that were selected
for them but that they still felt in
charge of and just to give you a feel
for what people were saying at the time
the New York Times critic said I think
no one can see the exhibition without
feeling that he is a part of America
okay
another critic for different paper said
road to victory doesn't mold the
visitors opinions for that word smacks
of the fascist concept of dominating
men's minds this concept of not molding
opinion but rather letting opinion form
from below through the experience of
media is the alternative to fascist mass
media in this period okay so far so good
all right we're gonna take a serious
the computational now alright so in the
book I go on at some length about sort
of where this goes in the art world
where this goes in the propaganda world
and I don't talk as much about where it
goes in the computer world but it goes
very directly into cybernetics and
Norbert wieners vision of computer
networks so Wiener isn't actually in
this picture Margaret Mead is her
husband Gregory Bateson is back here
the Macy conference is the actual the
first Macy conference took place almost
in parallel with the first committee for
national morale meeting also in New York
in 1941 they went on through the 50s and
they became a place where the
anthropologists and sociologists who had
been part of the committee for national
morale actually engaged with scientists
technologists biologists and others were
part of the world that brought us
cybernetics I want to provoke more in
this talk than inform and I could give
you a whole night on Norbert Weiner and
I won't although if he were here he
would you've seen pictures of Norbert
Weiner right yeah I think his girth says
it all he's he's just big and strong I
love the man in any case weiners core
idea was drawn in large part I think
from the kind of surround theories that
were floating around in the committee
for national morale Weiner like the key
members of the committee for national
morale was a radical anti-fascist and he
believed that human beings needed to be
understood as self-regulating feedback
mechanisms the beauty of computers was
that they modeled what a democratic
citizen might be like not an obedient
member of a fascist bundle but rather a
system moving through space seeking
things getting feedback from that are
changing their behavior accordingly and
to give you a feel for what this sounded
like in in wieners language let me read
you a little passage from the human use
of human beings which was his attempt to
translate his theories of cybernetics
for a general public was a best-seller
in 1950 our view of society differ
differs from the ideal of society which
is held by many fascist strong men in
business and government similar men of
sorry similar men of AM
four-power are not entirely unknown in
scientific and educational institutions
within MIT such you could where he
worked at the time such people prefer an
organization in which all orders come
from above and none return I wish to
devote this book to a protest against
this inhuman use of human beings for in
my mind any use of a human being in
which less is demanded of him and less
and less is attributed to him than his
full status is a degradation and a waste
he goes on to compare the fascist person
to the ant the ant is imagined as a
mechanistic follower of collective
orders I'm thinking ok by the way this
is also the book in which the Star Trek
transporter is first theorized just so
you know it's a fun fact for an aside
but um you know ants ants are those
obedient creatures to be fully human in
his view is to recognize that you are an
information system seeking information
from other systems that's what makes you
democratic you hear the fusion here
right of technical feedback and
democratic individualism they're
starting to get entangled ok now in the
book I take this story forward down two
lines
the thing that I'm calling the
Democratic surround this multimedia
environment designed to produce
Democratic psyches emerges in World War
two and it comes all the way down to the
counterculture down two lines it
migrates through propaganda exhibitions
overseas and I'll show you one of those
it also migrates through art world and
I'll talk a little bit about those at
every stage computation is part of the
process computation is entangle in each
of these things
um just a pause for a riff I'd always
thought that computers were sort of a
cultural objects before us got to know
them I thought they were you know
devices that were somehow outside
culture that did their own thing and we
worked with them and they were tools one
of the things that you see when you do
historical work is all the radical
efforts to contextualise computers and
to make them mean in terms of cultural
projects that are underway at that
moment let me take you to one here
this is one my favorites he said to
pause for the beauty of that this is
Moscow 1959 this is something called the
American National Exhibition it was
sponsored by Khrushchev
Khrushchev had been on American
television and had made a mistake he had
said he got an angry with the host and
he said look if if you let us have an
exhibition of Soviet goods in Manhattan
we'll let you have an American
exhibition in Moscow we were all over it
okay and so in 59 the American state the
United States Information Agency any
number of large American corporations
pooled their resources and built an
enormous exhibition scene by 2 million
Soviets and here in Moscow and this is a
picture of its core area this is a
geodesic dome designed by Buckminster
Fuller it's glittering gold on the
outside these are seven screens provided
by the Eames ray and Charles Eames and
they are designed they're part of an
exhibition called glimpses of the USA
and they're all single image slides that
move not in tandem they're all just
seven different slides at every time
they're designed to show Soviets
abundance but they're also designed to
give Soviets the experience of multi
image choice on which democracy depends
I want a flag for you here in sort of
short form when you talk about it more
later a weird depoliticization that has
just occurred in the 40s the committee
for national morale was radically
anti-racist and radically Pro gender
diversity and pro sexual choice
diversity that's not something that we
remember at all we think of this is an
entirely closeted period it wasn't here
the same mechanisms of choice that had
been meant in the 40s to offer you the
chance to get to know and identify with
folks who are different than yourself to
reach out to races and sexual
preferences that might not be your own
have begun to look a lot like commercial
choice this is a the American actual
National Exhibition is filled with
consumer products in fact this is where
the kitchen debate took place that's
right about down here there's a little
kitchen installed and Nixon and
Khrushchev debate there okay um this is
what the environment looked like when
you entered it this is the core
environment you can
see just people surrounded by images I
think that one on the right is actually
a tagged image from family of man but
I'm not sure that's glimpses of the USA
overhead alright so pause for archival
terror I had this horrible wonderful but
horrible experience in the archives I
was at the United States information our
agency archives in Maryland and I found
some recently Declassified reports from
the United States Information Agency and
I found one that blew my mind it said it
was it was a it was an articulation of
exhibition policy is a big dry dull
document no it said what we need to do
as a nation is act like therapists we
have to first assess the psychological
condition of our target populations then
we need to stage a communication
intervention to change that
psychological condition and then third
step we need to test to see if our
intervention has worked okay and this
was deployed in spades in Moscow the
Moscow environment was surveilled to a
degree that's hard to imagine today we
said well maybe not um sorry my bad um
we said 20 russian-speaking students
they're college students the Russians
were amazed you'd let us talk to them
didn't know that at the end of every day
the Russians were debriefed by minders
from the State Department this is a
computer donated by IBM programmed with
4,000 answers to questions the Soviets
might ask about America that's a Russian
speaking interpreter he receives the
question types it in gets an answer back
as you might guess the primary purposes
the computer is not in fact to answer
Soviet questions but rather to record
them we didn't know a lot about the
mindset of the Soviet Union at this
point and we needed to one of the
wonderful things about studying this is
that the records for this are copious
the American government kept copies of
every Russian publication everything
that had to do with this they had
notebooks guest books where you could
sign your name and write a comment those
are all summed up and reported back to
Washington everyday okay it's a it's a
huge deal so this is one place where
computation gets sucked up into the
surround in a way that has to do with
surveillance
and consumer culture in a way that we'll
see a little bit later the other place
where this starts to happen is actually
in the art world and I had always been
taught that the art world was a world
that was sort of outside big Cold War
culture outside Commerce I knew that the
CIA had funded some painting but I
didn't think that someone like John Cage
had been close to that world I was wrong
this is John Cage the famous composer
those of you who don't know him won't
know that he's probably most famous for
a composition called four minutes and 33
seconds in which he sat someone at a
piano I won't go on for four minutes but
you get the idea he sat someone at a
piano and they did nothing
eventually they lifted the top of the
piano closed it but the point was that
he wanted people to experience sounds
around them in a way that would allow
them to integrate those sounds into a
new form of American personality I was
always told that Cage had come to this
aesthetic through his encounter with
Eastern religion
I actually was very lucky I found new
stash of documents at the Northwestern
University music library and I'm willing
to say here and now that that's not the
case at all that in fact in the late 30s
and early 40s when cage was married to a
woman he had a very different life he
was a fairly rabid patriot in fact he
was in New York he met and taught for a
summer with the new Bauhaus folks I just
mentioned to you and then in 41 he
actually went to Chicago for a year to
teach with these same folks he was
immersed in a group of people focused on
the surround and he believed that music
would be a tool of patriotic revolution
he even sent percussion music was 39
percussion music is revolution sound and
rhythm have too long been submissive to
the restrictions of 19th century music
today we are fighting for their
emancipation tomorrow with electronic
music in our ears we will hear freedom
doesn't it feel good to say okay so Cage
is intimately involved with a number of
propaganda exhibitions I won't go into
that here what I do want to say though
is that his understanding of the sonics
around
and emerges from the same aesthetic that
Herbert Beier was using to create the
visual surround and not simply the same
aesthetic but literally the same social
group of people all of whom are
connected to the committee for national
morale and the may see group who bring
us cybernetics so jump forward a little
bit Black Mountain College home of the
American avant-garde in this period
famous for producing art performance art
poetry that's John Cage on the Left
that's Merce Cunningham his partner
dancing Buckminster Fuller this is where
Buckminster Fuller first deployed his
version of the geodesic dome 1948 cage
and Cunningham go to Black Mountain
College to teach summer school in 1952
they come back and they staged the very
first happening looking around the room
I'm like there's not nearly enough gray
hair in this room happenings ladies and
gentlemen were the quintessential
countercultural art form of the late 50s
and early 1960s the first one actually
took place here in 1952 and let me tell
you what happened a bunch of people
walked into a room there were chairs
there was a ladder somebody climbed the
ladder and acclaimed a poem a dog ran
around okay somebody pounded on a piano
and then several people put tea cups on
chairs that was it now think for a
second right like on what planet is that
so important to people that it sparks
two decades worth of art no I mean like
huh right well I think it only works in
a world where the the the idea that if
you surround people with a seemingly
random experience and give them the
chance and the choice to knit that
experience into their own lives and
bodies you will free them that's a world
in which happening begins to look like
an impact of empowerment an act of
freedom
hey cage goes to New York in 1957 and he
begins teaching the founders of The
Happening world
these are Allan Kaprow dick Higgins
bunch of other folks they go on to
produce happenings and in 1966 they
helped with it's complicated but they
shape
this thing an exhibition at the
Riverside Museum in New York called by a
journalist covering it for I think it
was Life magazine a be in it was a
multimedia psychedelic environment that
you were to enter and by entering begin
to understand yourself as a global
citizen as someone who was one with the
global forces this ladies and gentlemen
though it doesn't look like it was the
aesthetic of late Universal humanism
okay so that's that's where we are this
is not a world without computers
strangely enough this is a world in
which computer scientists and engineers
particularly from Bell Labs very much
want to play and a world in which
artists very much want to engage
engineers this is something called the
pavilion the PEFC pavilion in 1970 at
the Osaka World's Fair
these here this is the entryway here
these are cybernetic organisms they're
little self-motivating things on wheels
think I'll really make talking noises if
you bump into them they take your
feedback and go backwards okay we're
meant to play with those once you went
inside you entered a world that was
meant to be a three-dimensional
computational and multimedia 'td
experience before I say a little bit
about how that works let me just say
about the communities that were here
making this two groups experiments in
art and technology a group of engineers
and artists from New York led by Billy
kluever an engineer from Bell Labs
closely affiliated with Robert
Rauschenberg
John Cage both of whom were members and
a series of performance artists from
that world some of whom had been
involved in cages happenings some in the
ESCO shrine they build this on contract
to Pepsi because of course Pepsi as you
know is bringing us the young generation
right what does what does the Pepsi song
come on somebody knows this oh it's
funny that no one knows this anymore
they would be but they'd be mortified ah
right they began singing Pepsi
generation song this was
to be a modern Pepsi generation kind of
thing so they set it up in Japan but
what it really is is a computer monitor
monitored and maintained environment
designed to produce psychological
freedom it's completely fascinating so
um you enter underground you come up you
enter this thing called the mirror room
in the mirror room you stand on the
ground and there's a mylar giant
inflated mylar dome you look up and
because of the way the dome is built you
see your own image in three dimensions
upside down you enter literally a
surround in which you are mirrored
Facebook seriously
okay the lights are controlled by
programs on punched paper tape which are
here and the artist is not called an
artist or a creator or a host or happen
or or a bee in draw a generator no no no
the artist is called a programmer and
they are there to manage the environment
the environment itself is a living
example of cybernetic principles this is
one of my favorite pictures these are
hostess's Japanese hostesses assigned to
the pavilion there was a section of
floor it's actually fairly large section
I think it might have been about a
hundred square feet in which each panel
of the floor has sensors underneath and
as you walk across it it produces
different sounds so one section produces
rustling grass another produces gravel
you hear these sounds with these
handsets and in the process you become
part of a cybernetic loop you become
part of the cybernetic system but not in
a way that we might imagine is
surveilled or controlled but rather in a
way that frees you to experience the
diversity of the natural and the
mechanical world as part of a single
global information system remember that
Weiner says we are but patterns of
information in rivers of time here you
get to actually experience that as such
so you might think that there's a happy
ending here this is the 1967 human being
Golden Gate Park sparks the Summer of
Love in about six months tens of
thousands of people gather in the park
they are precisely the kind of
self-seeking self-affirming highly
individuated people
the Margaret Mead and the members of the
committee for national morale called for
in 1941 you know but there's a problem
I want to see if I can lay it out in the
context of the late 30s in the early
1940s the idea of a media surround and
of Gestalt a Psychology underlying it is
enormously freeing it's a it's a robust
antidote to mass media and the threat of
fascism that mass media seems to carry
and you can see it here this is actually
a 1955 the family of man on display in
Washington people who are moving in this
space feel enormous ly free and they
write about it at great lengths and it's
all in the book I won't bore you with it
here they feel free to cluster to clump
to see images of people who are unlike
themselves the family of man has
pictures of traditional Japanese ten
years after the war an amazing thing to
see pictures of Africans and African
Americans made by Africans and African
Americans held up on equal terms to
pictures of white folks in the same show
this is a show that engages diversity
and that by moving freely among it you
begin to imagine yourself as a free
citizen in a diverse society so much to
the good trouble is as you can see in
this picture you feel free and you are
in a world that appears radically open
and free to you but there's a backstage
and you can't see it not only is there a
backstage but these images have been
carefully selected for you you are
actually inhabit a feeling free in and
feeling individuated by a world that has
been intensely curated in which power is
being exercised on you through
aggregation and in which those who are
doing the work are invisible
you can shout back at Herman Goering but
who do you shout back to here
these people who built this show Edward
Steichen Herbert Beier who influenced it
they genuinely believe they're freeing
you how do you shout back to them and to
conclude gentlemen I'm afraid that's
where we are now this is the Consumer
Electronics Show in 2010 as you'll see
that the precise replica of the pavilion
from 1970
we inhabit a world in which individual
freedom individuation personal choice
reaching out to connect with distant
others folks unlike ourselves have
become the terms by which we are managed
by which we are organized by which our
social lives are turned into the
fundamental terms of profit and this is
a paradox I don't know where to go from
here I'm hoping you do thank you very
much you don't need to be near me but
thanks so we have time for questions
it's essential for the recording that
you wait for the mic before you ask your
question no matter how eager you are we
have one at the back and I so remember
you'll be on the web at the end hey Fred
we we taught the Democratic surround in
comparative Media Studies this year
thank you and we had a great discussion
about it and what's interesting because
of course when you teach grad students
the first thing they learn to do is pick
stuff apart yeah that and and so the
picking apart that they did to your book
I found really interesting what they
were concerned with was this question of
how weak these tools were in response to
how powerful broadcast media was so this
whole idea that somehow a pavilion that
a few thousand people walk through or a
John Cage performance that somehow that
was gonna counteract a radio broadcast
hang everyone's home that that seemed
incredibly weak at the same time you're
leaving us at this moment of sort of
incredible strength and control that
this whole notion of stage management
this whole notion of sort of creating
these architectures now is encompassing
more than a billion people we're my
students under valuing those pavilions
and those art movement
or were they not yet seeing this last
step which you've only really brought in
post-book in the ways in which this sort
of stage management is now the precursor
for sort of platform control today so I
would thank you that's a wonderful
question I was gonna hide behind the
screen that I usually hide behind with a
question like this which is I never
believed what my subjects did right my
subject believed my subjects believed
that these sources were powerful
I was always ambivalent about it but
they really did believe it whether they
were naive or not I don't know you know
in retrospect I don't think they're
naive I didn't go into this in the book
because I wanted the book to stop
cleanly as a history I wanted to I was
just trying to explain sort of where a
particular mode of Management came by
the 1960s and the story after that gets
taken up a lot in the counterculture
book so I didn't want to go farther but
but I think your students are wrong
actually yeah no I think your students
are wrong and I think this is actually a
legacy for the left more generally we
tend to on the left think of ourselves
as being the folks who push back on
bureaucratic fascist hierarchical
systems that imprison otherwise
authentic individuals and what I would
argue is that the system I've just
described to you is a system designed to
produce authentic individuals and in the
production of your authenticity lies the
beginning of your imprisonment in this
system
Thanks great question
that's kind of a bummer huh have we got
some other ones one on the way back so
could you repeat that
sure yeah yep yep so so so the so this
is irony here right and one of things
that I do a lot of my work is I get kind
of preoccupied with this these systems
were designed to maximize the
individuation of the people who
encountered them so in going to the
family of man you were offered 500
images and you were encouraged to walk
among them to find the images that were
most meaningful to you and to knit those
images into a personal experience that
could be robust and coherent inside
yourself in a way theorized by Gestalt
psychology and that would that would
make you more individual you and I would
go and see the same images but different
images would be meaningful to you and to
me we would be individuated by this
collective experience okay so far so
good okay so where this becomes a
problem is when we start to think about
what the terms of our individual are the
images but against which we are
individuating ourselves have in fact
been selected for us within certain
genres I happen to think that the images
offered and family of man were in fact
deeply liberating at that historical
moment and that the images offered on
Facebook are not so much and we can talk
about those differences but the notion
that by curating a world we will free
the people inside it is is fundamentally
wrong I think does it am I making sense
maybe not so much now completely I still
don't understand but okay I guess
there's two different kinds you know
there's two different kinds of people
involved in two different movements and
people who think very differently so one
on one hand you have the artists you
have the designers of the exhibition
right and they're not the oppressors I
disagree I really disagree with that I
think this is really important I think
John Cage would think of himself as a
liberator but just as he is liberating
us in his sound space and took pushing
away Beethoven and saying I'm going to
teach you how to listen to the world
around you he is in fact also teaching
us how to inhabit a mode of subjectivity
entirely appropriate for a consumer
society well but I mean
you know you're here interpreting and
things for us and you're generating
stuff and I don't feel oppressed by that
so yeah I don't think in cage we think
of himself as an oppressor obviously but
you know do you think of yourself I mean
as an oppressor accurate I mean I don't
mean that - just because you're curating
for us and I don't think that no right
now we all curate for each other at
different times there may not
necessarily a tool of oppression so why
they jump to that yeah you're pointing
to a really important question which is
maybe maybe I could phrase this a little
bit differently which is under what
conditions did the otherwise Liberatore
efforts of these folks become oppressive
and I roll that sentence back sir so so
so I would argue that in the 40s the
committee for national morale efforts
were in fact genuinely Liberatore like I
think they really actually did help
people imagine themselves differently
and I would say the same for cages
compositions at some point really in the
mid 50s with something with a campaign
called the people's capitalism and it
was sponsored by the National
advertising agency in Unites States
government
those same forms began to turn toward
become becoming training for consumption
and the political valence that was
attached to them at their birth
disappeared the anti-racist implications
melted away the the sort of pro
diversity implications melted away and
we ended up with diversity and choice
being the language of consumption and
the notion of self production being one
wedded to consumption as opposed to
encounters with other folks I'm very
happy to go deep on this afterwards I
want make sure everybody gets a shot at
this thank you but yeah very happy to go
deep on it later thanks thank you and
I've just should I called you want to
call okay yes so you call you call and
I'll answer great Thanks hi thank you
very much for your presentation yeah
it's very provocative argument one thing
I would like to know your opinion on is
how you
similarly following up on that question
is it seems like you're positioning the
artists under something that they did
have you know they did lead to these
modes of very specific limited choice
within you know what we have but it was
the artists just because they paved the
way for consumer society as your
argument why would we say that it's not
the companies that been right under
under the logic of capitalism I mean so
that's that's another super important
question I think we have this habit
historically and and in the present of
looking for bad actors and for looking
for centers of concentrated financial or
material power as the sources of bad
action - I would tell us a little more
personally my first book was a book
about how Americans remember the Vietnam
War and I spent a long time with a group
of traumatized combat vets in Vietnam
combat vets in a Veterans Administration
Day program in Boston and in working
with them the constant challenge that
the constant mystery to them one of the
most traumatizing features of their
lives was that they had done things that
were entirely contrary to their own
moral beliefs and yet they had done them
were they made to do them hmm where I'm
going with this is it's back to the
world of John Cage and others you know
they may well have believed that they
were doing liberating things but they as
were many corporate leaders in the
period many corporate leaders believed
that they were freeing the world around
us that doesn't mean that they're the
choices they made didn't have
alternative kinds of kinds of impacts
let me say about artists more
specifically I want to I want to really
say that artists don't look very good in
this book at the end of the day Herbert
Beier helps create the Aspen Institute
that you know a massive corporate Center
okay but he's by far the are the most
benign the folks who look really
terrible in my eyes are the happen errs
Allan Kaprow and his crowd when you go
look at pictures of happenings I did not
know this they're almost exclusively
young white men what women are in the
pictures tend to be naked under sheets
which have been soaked in water their
pictures of women with their mouths
stuffed with vegetables Yoko Ono makes
her bones arguably covering herself in
cream and having it licked off by male
artists or having her clothes cut off or
by my artist yeah you could say that's a
claiming of power I don't buy it
you know there are a few happen errs who
are women very few Carolee schneemann
would be a good example but but but that
was a a radically oppressive environment
that claimed to be a radically
liberating one yeah
um I had a question about the where's
where are you I can't see the voice from
nowhere so I kept thinking about the the
art pieces and the kind of benevolent
intentions behind them and wondering you
know as like as modern artists what
people can do to protect against these
kinds of like accidental oppressions I'd
like keep thinking about like The Truman
Show and don't you know the movie where
he like he believes he's totally
liberated but the the fake walls around
him and so how if you were to go back
and like you could be there with the
family man
how would you how would you redesign
that exhibit to be actually Liberatore
instead of being like so I love your
phrase accidentally oppressive I think
that's accidental oppression I think
that's a really helpful and useful
phrase the family man's a tough case to
work with because I've actually written
a long paper on it which I argue that it
is Liberatore and I would argue that
it's sort of the last of its kind it's
the last moment at which race and gender
and class are right on the front stage
and you're asked to really think those
things through so I think it's a harder
case I don't really have a good answer
but I'll speculate my speculation would
be to pay if you were an artist to be
very close attention to who you're
collaborating with all the folks I'm
talking with talking about here are
collaborating as many artists at MIT do
in ways that I would not denigrate with
large corporate actors large technology
firms which also may have military
contacts which may be tied up in lots of
different kinds of things in even
setting that aside I'm struck by the
relative paucity of impoverished people
right in the discussion in the in the
mid world there was a real effort to
reach out to folks who were not like
ourselves and and and that effort I
think has melted away I sometimes get
asked what I think utopia is these days
right and my answer actually is a church
I go to periodically in San Francisco
called glide memorial live memorial is a
radically affirming Methodist Church
where they took the cross off the wall
and brought it out into the street
because they thought it belong with the
people it's the only place in my life I
teach at Stanford it's the only place in
my life where I meet people of all
different classes all different races
all different life experiences and we do
things together on equal terms that that
wasn't what happenings were happenings
claimed to equalize society now they
just made it easier for audiences to
come in that's very different so so who
are you working with I think is part of
the big is that is the first place I'd
start like when I brought up the family
man I think it was because you mentioned
that people felt like they were free but
in jet but in fact there was this highly
curated space and it's something I was
actually just thinking about so it's how
do you like or how does an artist like
have a highly curated space with a
vision but still like bring in this
opportunity for serendipity or for a
chance like that kind of egalitarian but
it gets worse because now I really have
to confess I am actually an oppressor in
this sense no no this is actually really
important because I realizes you're
asking your question that I think the
family of man is Liberatore because it
promotes values that I celebrate it asks
folks to literally identify with those
who are different than themselves and
imagine themselves as members of a poly
racial society I really don't know it's
a great question hi oh hey thanks thank
you for your presentation
I'm Joelle and I'm an interactive artist
and I could argue about all right for
you but there is just quest well I have
a question but I also have a comment
brief I would say that it's it would be
very hard for me to argue like in which
way John Cage and fellow artists of the
time would have influenced people so far
I don't think because no one knew
necessarily Cage's agenda of liberation
people have been like how could you and
how could you think that cage and others
how could you measure
their influence and the fact that they
have reached much beyond the scope of
their little circle of friends and
community in the 60s they probably have
influenced so many people rich and poor
you know from all continents so I think
it's it's hard to to have an opinion on
like based on an assumption that they
were oppressors that they have actually
maybe reached beyond that scope yeah
very fair point I went to Poland and
gave this presentation at a cage
conference or version of the present day
she was talking about cage and the polls
were too polite to say you know you're
wrong what they did that was fascinating
though they older Polish professors
staged a neo K gene happening at this
event because they saw a cage as a
vision of freedom from the Soviet Union
in its period what what I want to argue
is that that that's exactly right within
the arc of their history and I'm gonna
plead that my vision of cage as a proto
oppressor only makes sense within the
arc of history that I'm telling he's
taken up very differently in other
places and I totally respect that you
can see that that that challenge again
now yes they think about the maker
movement right the maker movement is
being taken up in China in India in ways
that might in fact be quite liberating
in those spaces even even as I would
argue that it's a promotion of the
californian ideology here in the US so
so you know yes you have a very
important point there well I could
actually also discuss that point where
actually the practices of making in
India or Ghana or Nigeria or in China
I've actually influenced like also our
perspective of repurposing for that
point my question was because the talk
mentions interactivity and going back to
this and and maybe we can also mention
Cage notion of randomness and chance but
I'm as an artist who uses interactivity
I do feel that I embrace interactivity
when I encountered it in 96
as a way for me to actually pose the
question of choice and pose a question
of free will so in that sense I'm not
trying to put an agenda necessarily out
there but I feel that interactivity is
the is the best option that I have as an
artist to propose the consciousness of
choice right
and Margaret Mead would celebrate you
yeah that's that's really important I I
we can talk about the varieties of
interactivity I don't think all the
modes of interactivity are alike you
know Walt Disney thought he was an
interactivity artist too but we got the
longer conversations but Margaret Mead
would be really happy you're here yeah
scenes make a movement and those things
we already mentioned walk right into it
tonight yeah yeah I forgot I'm at MIT
right okay I'm really interested in what
is your verdict and you know if you look
at rhetorics of hacking and creative
misappropriation and so on is this also
something that is infused with some kind
of government allottee or would you say
that okay this is actually something
that is against this kind of staging of
experience and and I'm wondering you
know in this context whether sometimes
you know let's say top-down democratic
structures and infrastructures can not
necessarily I can also have something
liberating in that sense so you got a
couple pieces here I'll try to keep my
rant kind of short you're looking at a
guy who wrote an essay in defense of
bureaucracy okay
because bureaucracies were designed to
create spaces in which people could not
act out their filial loyalties to their
families or their home villages or their
groups of prejudice or their stereotypes
but had to in fact act in accord with
negotiated rules for the public good or
for the good of whoever managed to
negotiate those rules but so so but I
think that's really important right I
mean how do you what are things that
happened to me if I looked at communes
communes in the 60s communes in the 60s
were places where everybody was supposed
to be free but what happened in those
places was that when you drop the rules
of bureaucracy when you stop negotiating
on rule
you shifted to negotiating based on cool
the coolest person just said you know
that's so uncool man you don't need your
money back you know and people not like
that person we're just kind of uncool
you know yeah black folks can come here
that's okay you know we're open to it
but you know most of our so uncool if
the whole Panther thing going you know
what's that about right so this is the
kind of way the power works in that
space so in that context yes I think
that rule based bureaucratic
institutionally housed systems for the
management and propagation of equality
among citizens of different potentials
and resources are absolutely central ok
let's stop there the making and hacking
stuff you know I don't I haven't got it
figured out I'm doing a paper now on the
on the maker movements strange
resuscitation of the deepest wells of
American culture
my first intellectual affection was the
American Puritans and when I read the
confessionals of makers about how they
were lost in an economic wilderness and
found their way to tech shop or a
makerspace or a hacker space and were
reborn thanks to the spirit of
creativity that they discovered via
passion inside themselves
that's a Puritan conversion narrative
which is the oldest and most defining
narrative in American literary culture
so my argument in that space this is not
maybe going to help but is that is that
what where we live now is a world where
we have all these technologists and
business men calling for disruption and
saying I'm just RUP ting the society I'm
disrupting their culture oh no no no no
you are drawing on reinforcing and
remarketing the deepest values of the
culture I'm going to go even farther and
say that it's only because you're doing
that that your inventions make sense to
the rest of us you can't sell something
that people don't recognize it's a part
of the work of the communities that I
study is to make emerging things
recognizable in older terms which has
this ironic effect can disrupt a
marketplace but reinforce the power of a
culture so even now as we are exporting
interactivity and hacking and other
modes of life abroad we are I would
argue in a moment of the greatest
American cultural expansion since the
50s it's just it's just an expansion
that everybody's volunteering for that
some great work by the way out there
Lili irani is wonderful UCSD she's she's
terrific
Sylvia Lintner has done amazing work on
this as a lot of great people writing in
this area
yeah okay so um the point that really
stuck out for me from what you were
talking about was this and this is on
the invisibility of the curation itself
also which I think does easily kind of
connect as the conundrum we've got today
with kind of the invisible curation of
great so to me though that leads to kind
of a the easy solution of that is
transparency right so we want to make
visible the invisible aspects of this
system I'm curious how would that have
worked historically and then how is that
complicated today when the complexity of
the decisions that are being made is
perhaps beyond the scope of our
traditional kind of transparency
mechanisms so transparency is a really
good start the trouble with transparency
is if you imagine it as like crowd based
transparency you're imagining that all
people can see through the window with
the same eyes and have the same agency
to effect change on the other side of
the window and that's not true in the
50s and it's not true now but for
different reasons in the 50s Steichen
Beyer were very well-known figures they
were actually paraded widely in the
press you could have written to the
Museum of Modern Art you could have
written a letter to the editor but but
those folks are institutionally
entrenched figures and it's very hard
for Joe public to move and
institutionally entrenched figure that's
part of their nature now one of the
things that I think a lot of computer
scientists I know are excited about is
the possibility of building systems in
which institutionally entrenched figures
don't have power the trouble is that the
algorithms that manage those systems
frequently automate the very modes of
power that the formerly entrenched
individuals have and now how do you how
do you how do you make that kind of
automation visible and negotiable I
truly don't know I think that's one of
the great questions for our era Helenus
embalm at NYU has been working on this
pretty hard she's got the best take that
I know I truly don't know but I think we
might be the queen people in this room
might be the very people who could
figure that out my own impulses were
shaped during the Vietnam War and and
and I and are very sort of conventional
lefty I kind of want to see us elect the
right people and run the state better I
recognize how hard that is under
conditions of rampant corruption and
massive corporate and non corporate just
big money sponsorship I haven't got a
better option to that
I wish I did and maybe you guys come up
with one I'd love that hi I would like
to go back to the question of resistance
yes you kind of love us with that and
the way in which you relate oppression
yep and freedom and particularly
oppression in terms of being located in
actors right whether it's cage or other
people and then the way in which you
talk about the individual of the three
men as coming from an environment which
is not particularly located in any side
forces and whether you think of that
environment as having completely
subsumed any possibility of individual
outside of capitalism and outside of
yeah because partly one of the things
that seems to me to be hard then is that
the solution for resistance is only
coming up with a different immersive and
mediated environment that can free yes
and so we're the practices ok what a
wonderful question thank you thank you
thank you okay a couple thoughts the
first thought is that the the surround
that I've been describing one of my
goals in the book is to say that it is
in fact anchored in very specific
historical communities and institutional
locations we're sitting in one of them
now okay so so there are actors here
with agendas who move through history
together and are actively in different
settings trying to colonize things I'm
some of you may know that the Center for
International Studies was may still be
here at MIT very involved in planning
the Vietnam War many of the people doing
that planning were immersed in this
aesthetic and began to imagine that we
could deploy in Vietnam the kind of
management and control that were
deployed museums
it's the archives are here it's wild so
there is a deliberate oppressive
movement that moves through the book and
rises for the end however I don't
believe that the surround has become
impermeable I don't believe that
everyone is in meshed in it what I'd
like to do I think there's a lot of
different kinds of folks out there who
actually have very little access to
technology or even media that much who
should be tapped
I actually think ironically it's the
in America who are most preoccupied with
self formation image management self
branding network building all the things
that we all know how to do and that that
ironically that I elite self focused
narcissistic style is a style that makes
it harder to reach out to precisely the
people who would be able to resist and
who need to resist who can lead that
resistance one encouraging moment black
lives matter those many of those are
folks coming from what would be from the
surround story the periphery at least
inside the United States you know how do
we and I think our challenge as folks
here in this elite pinnacle institution
what have we done lately about Flint
right I haven't done anything about
Flint I'll go back to Stanford and think
thoughts about the Puritans I'm sort of
embarrassed by that right but it but
it's a fact you know what are we done
about Detroit we're a weird country we
have these incredible first world
centers where people can pursue you know
self self-development it all turns we'd
all be Maslow's and we have Detroit I
don't know so I think the answer to
resistance has to come from Detroit and
the challenge to those of us who inhabit
the surround spaces is to get out of
them enough to hear the voices of people
like those in Detroit that means
parenthetically going to places that we
may find reprehensible or repugnant I go
to churches
I am very at the least conflicted about
theology okay at the very least you know
some of my best friends are members of
the Mormon Church Mormon Church's stance
on gay Americans makes me want to you
know Chuck but these folks and their
beliefs and their churches and those
folks are people who can help us build
an America that is not invest in the
world I've just described but is in fact
genuinely diverse open collaborative you
got to reach out to those who aren't in
your circle already does that help yeah
you've been silenced my question is on
the rate of adoption right because like
okay this presents us with that
possibility but it's not guaranteed
right that then this individual gets on
board I remember in the 90s that with my
left his friends at the University of
Rome we were ridiculing people going
around with the first cell phones right
and now I'm hooked
so ideologically I wasn't on board right
but then something happened and I'm
thinking here of gilbert simondon work
on the process of trans individuation
when he talks about the technical
invention proceeds from individual to
individual without the communitarian
integration that is guaranteed by a
collective mythology so he says there is
something in technology that creates a
community of inventors as well as a
community of users so that I'm now
relating to all the people who are using
a cell phone in this room if by the very
fact of using the same technology and
the artists you have been looking at are
I've been working with technologists and
perhaps can be described as technologies
themselves and so I wonder whether there
is something this is also still aryan
argument right burn a circular argument
that draws us there right towards this
around that is not just ideological
because you are curated all the part of
the transmission of ideas but what about
the a signifying non signifying
processes that lead us in that direction
so I'm I'm I'm I would be I might
persuade me but as a starting point I I
think I would have to say I don't
believe in a signifying processes I
think I would have to say that I believe
in history and that our draw toward the
devices that we use is historically
specific and that we get the devices we
get partly because of the moments that
we're in and we take them up the way
that we take them up because of the
moments that we're in take the example
the cell
I don't think the cellphone makes any
sense until we have airplanes in cars
I think airplanes and cars give us a
kind of mobility that we can that a
mobility in which the cellphone makes
sense you know in my grandmother's time
growing up in rural Texas right she
probably went a mile from the house she
went as far as she could walk in that
world a cell phone makes no sense at all
so I think maybe the question to ask
isn't that steagle area moment rather is
what historical conditions create the
pasta create the possibilities or
incentives for desires that move in some
directions and not others and and that
that that also this gets back to this
question of sort of who's in power right
that does not presume that there's an
evil power figure anywhere demanding
that you know demanding to appropriate
our authentic being like I've stopped
believing in appropriation stories
actually that's another thing I've kind
of let go of as I age what I see instead
is all of us genuinely and usually
authentically and kindly trying to work
our lives out in conditions that we
didn't make and trying to figure it out
and and you know it starts it's it can
be a little bit like fish in the ocean
when the waters called on one side all
the fish go the other way and it's not
because the fish were drawn toward the
warmer you know that had some kind of
native feeling because they were just
like boom boom so I put it back on
history thanks these are the hardest
questions I've ever had we're gonna have
just one more and I think we have to
wait for my cocktails okay
no definitely yeah yeah no I'm all good
I'm fired up because I know a cocktail
is coming thank you and in the in the
interest of completing this row and feel
feel free to rephrase this question but
I guess the question is really like this
makes me think you know like what are I
guess the basic agencies that are
relevant for democracy grant if we've
gone through these right because you
know you met you mentioned black lives
matter but I mean the reason why it's
black life matters interesting is
because it demonstrates a paradox in our
attitude toward universal life right
like there's the the sense of course
that everyone would say on official
terms that black lives matter but
the facts on the ground speak
differently and so the reason why why
this is significant is because it's
dealing with this kind of rupture in our
and our common sense and that's that's
that's agency like that's interesting
yeah
whereas like my ability to plan my
calendar with X app and everything else
like that all of that fades away and
doesn't matter so I want to refer you
first to Ethan Zuckerman who's on the
side there and his Center for civic
media he has the most developed answer
to your question out there and it we
haven't book length in a little while so
I just want to refer you to say there's
somebody better at this there okay my
own take is a little bit different I I
think one of the things you see in
politics right now is a migration of
consumer style and consumer modes of
making choice back into the political
sphere so we begin to imagine that just
expressing ourselves forming our public
brands is sufficient for political
change you see this in the Occupy
movement I'm enormous ly disappointed in
occupy I could just cry when I think of
Occupy you know well occupy was busy
giving us the term the 90 percent of the
1 percent 10 percent whatever the Tea
Party was taking over Congress oops
I'm so angry I could spit about this I
you know yes we had the human radio
great we gave voice ok
we gave voice which brings us back to
the question of what matters for
democracy
I actually think what matters for
democracy is something that these folks
kind of missed but I can see why they
missed it these folks were focused on
individuation and the need to make
individuation the basis of a kind of
unity that would be non fascist and
ultimately non-bureaucratic
non-hierarchical I think they missed a
thing and I think the challenge for us
is to find what I think of as
institutions of collision that were
already in better shape in their period
than they are in ours Margaret Mead
worked at the Museum of American Natural
History she actually wrote a wonderful
essay called museums in the emergency
which gets which is makes the point that
I'm about to make
we need more institutions where we do
not cluster with those like ourselves as
individuals but rather where we
collaborate on terms legislated and made
explicit by rules with others who are
unlike ourselves who don't have as much
money who don't have as much education
who don't travel as much and who aren't
as preoccupied with the formation of
their inner selves so that's my answer
thank you all very much really nice to
be here
yeah thank you everyone for coming and
thank you for your really interesting
question and thank you thank you yeah
Cheers
