okay thanks very much my name is Damian
white I'm head of history philosophy
social science at RISD it's my very
great pleasure to introduce the
aesthetics and ethical making panel this
is of particular interest for our
institution in that we recently we as in
r is the President and other luminaries
just recently produced a book called the
ethical making and strongly identified
the future interests of RISD with
concerns about ethical making we're
going to be discussing here the nature
and role of aesthetics and value in
making things whether artistic or
designed objects and I think the the
panel will have a lot of overlap
particularly on environment social
justice concerns that we priests had in
the in the last panel we've got three
excellent speakers here today I'll just
briefly mention that we've got Allison
wilt will speak first from sheffield
hallam huge list of books and activities
and then we'll move on to Jonathan
masket from denison and then we will
finish up with Adrian par from the
University of Cincinnati so without
further ado thank you
oh thank you thank you for that good
morning everyone my name is Allison
Welton I should just say my area is
fashion and sustainability so if you
were wondering I'll start by saying that
you know it's quite widely accepted that
clothes enable people to express their
values interests and identity and of
course fashion and clothing choices are
a highly visual form of personal
expression and for many clothing
actually enhances independence
confidence and provides a sense of
well-being when consumers make garment
choices their place in importance on
both the aesthetic symbolic and social
significance of clothing in equal
measure to its function and so for some
where is the relationship to specific
pieces of clothing are deeply personal
and perhaps long-standing rather like
this is a case study of them dr.
sheegeen Sherman in Australia but to
others it's a fleeting engagement sorry
about that the aesthetics of fashion
vary widely but in the case of this
paper i'm thinking about the fashion
aesthetic as one that its associated
with a manufactured garment although
fashion garments that are developed to
be accepted and rejected in favor of new
styles their aesthetic varies according
to a range of criteria so for example
you know they've got to fit within a
brand or label image they've got to suit
a particular garment price point and
they have to of course reach a targeted
consumer however the fashion aesthetic
is rarely explored in light of the
ethical environmental and social issues
that arises a consequence of production
and consumption firstly though it's
important to ask how our fashions made
and by whom and the answer of course is
quite complex there are actually
millions of people who are involved in
the production of fashion from cotton
pickers to garment workers and
distributors brew it makes the point
though that to the browsing newspaper
reader and the house
consumer it's the named fashion designer
is fashion so the fashion industry
operates a hierarchical system at the
top of this pyramid is the name door
star designer and here this is where we
expect or associate fashion with
innovation and so it's these garments
that are heavily presented in the
fashion press and media like I said like
a pyramid that name designers at the top
and then below that the industry is
divided and separated into many
different market levels this ranges from
ready to wear to high street band brands
and mass market value products in the UK
of course we have supermarket fashion
but while all of these market levels
offer different types of garments they
all rely on the manufacturer and
successful sale of aesthetically
aesthetically pleasing trend driven
products that are off during the
interpretations of known catwalk looks
and styles but while fashion is
recognized for its outward facing social
and symbolic significance the negative
impacts that are related to its
production and consumption remain
largely invisible fashion designing for
sustainability involves engaging
strategies and approaches that can help
reduce or avoid the social environmental
economic and cultural impacts associated
with the production and consumption of
fashion clothing the fashion industry as
it stands makes use of natural resources
such as fossil fuels to create energy
for production process for example and
which release toxic emissions into the
atmosphere and at the same time of
course waters depleted for crop
cultivation textile processing and of
course laundering all which pollutes our
waterways with chemicals in the garment
factories where employment should be
considered positive the pay and working
conditions for many people are poor and
these along with all the other negative
impacts result as a consequence of the
activities involved a five distinct
phases in the life cycle of a garment
materials in their design production
distribution
and disposal in light of these
environments are IAM in light of these
negative impacts the number of fashion
producers have been improving the
environmental and ethical performance of
the products they make however the
visual language of sustainable or
ethical fashion seems to persist from
concepts that were explored in the early
1990s when the fashion industry began to
experiment with environmentalism and eco
fashion so specialist collections were
developed by fashion companies such as
esprit and they focused on using
environmentally friendly materials and
processes so we began to see organic
cotton appear in the mass market but
unfortunately the collections didn't
fare well because at this point in time
consumers becoming ever more
cost-conscious and that this was a
particular time when the fashion
industry was producing large volumes of
clothing offshore a strategy that
escalated poor labor rights and
sweatshop conditions for factory workers
today for designers producers and
consumers the aesthetic of sustainable
fashion is not necessarily associated
with the aesthetic of fashion as well as
argues to the fashion community terms
such as eco fashion Kunder up the hippie
and environmental movement's of the 60s
and 70s during which ecologically
sensitive fashion often meant shapeless
recycled clothing meanwhile many of the
highly visible case that is seen today
come from within the mass-market retail
sector and the outdoor performance
performance where market and these
include for example companies such as
Marks and Spencers in the UK and
Patagonia here in the US but the
emphasis of a fashion aesthetic is not
always the driving force for product
development and often these companies
produce basic or classic garments or
more broadly non trend driven clothing
and I have to make sure that that is a
distinction that's understood clothing
too many fashion consumers fashion is a
reaction against existing trends
and it's in pursuit of of the moment
styles and newness and all of this
gratifies a temporary evolving identity
and the fashion industry feeds this need
by developing garments that have this
built-in obsolescence fast fashion is
responsible for inexpensive high
turnover products but there is evidence
to suggest that fast fashion consumers
and they are typically young people they
support the idea of sustainability
although they tend to separate fashion
from sustainability when they make
purchasing choices so we could ask and
when I talk about we I'd more often talk
about the designer how can we motivate
consumers to adopt a responsible and
caring attitude towards the environment
and the garments they purchase ninny
Mackay argues that we ascribe value to a
product if we can experience enjoyment
with it it offers us into personal ties
and it becomes linked to the
constriction of our identity but despite
this it could be argued that the
consumer does not necessarily feel they
have any ethical or moral responsibility
to care could we advocate that through
the moral and ethical connections
associated with for example duty of care
with ownership environmental issues and
the much-publicised social conditions of
work forces that designers may be able
to motivate and really engage care
agendas some fashion companies have
attempted to do this than in the slide
here you can see 2008 John Smedley began
to commercially produce the luxury
redefined t-shirt and this was
constructed using organic and died
unbleached fair trade Peruvian cotton
while the garment in itself is
noteworthy one of the most interesting
things to come out of the project was
the perceived value in making the supply
chain transparent the entire design and
production journey of the t-shirt was
shared with the consumer and
this companies such as historic futures
are made by have been developing online
tools that support producers to collect
manage and share production data
alongside good practices but of course
the John Smedley t-shirt that you see
here is a luxury garment it's marketed
towards consumers aspiring to purchase
products that embody quality durability
and timeless aesthetics how do we then
transform the attitudes of consumers
purchasing fast fashion or trend driven
garments it's evident that the fashion
industry in its consumers have in
general struggle to fully engage with
sustainability but there are many
reasons for this Eco labeling for
example was developed as a tool to help
people identify environmentally safe
products and processes but it's known to
be causing confusion amongst both the
industry and the consumers many
consumers are also skeptical about the
reliability of claims being made or the
weary of accompanies motivations for
engaging with sustainability so with
these points in mind you could see that
it's quite clear that consumers would
benefit from fashion which clearly had a
visible green aesthetic when they're
making purchasing choices this would
make life simpler for people however as
we've seen consumers expect and often
reject these type of garments based on
their association with naturalness or
and I like this phrase from one
participant involved in a study that
said and I quote her directly at this
point the eco fashion ER I have seen is
not fashion they are just plain dull and
for older people perhaps there speaks a
young person
outside of the mass-market fashion and
outdoor performance where sectors
designer fashion labels and luxury
brands have in general been slow to this
challenge of sustainability and so the
fashion aesthetic that is needed to
motivate and encourage a transformation
in the production and consumption of
fashion is largely missing or when it is
present as you might see here on the
left it's generally misunderstood
ethical or sustainable fashion has to be
in the words of new Maki attractive a
good fit and visually pleasant to an
individual even if sustainable
principles are applied during its
creation however across the fashion
industry there is a general lack of
awareness to design-led approaches that
can be used to avoid or reduce negative
impacts so for example a significant
amount of textile waste is generated
because consumers discard clothing while
it still functions but waste could be
reduced if design-led approaches were
employed to change and improve attitudes
and practices towards clothing care so a
question might be then can the high
value placed on aesthetics in fashion
help motivate consumers and designers to
care for and about the garments in an
effort to reduce the negative impacts
I'm really interested in the idea of a
care perspective or care thinking that's
commonly associated to social policy
Health and Social Care but there's
little formal interpretation of this
term in terms of the practice of design
or how we think about designing so while
we know that empathy enables designers
to understand the experiences of others
the design anthropologist Elizabeth Dory
Tunstall she considers that empathy
alone does not automatically involve the
more positive act of caring we're caring
involves action here it could be argued
is where the fashion aesthetic may be
able to play a significant role in
encouraging designers and
Zoomers to act positively and care about
and for fashion garments in the slide
you're seeing a contemporary
interpretation of a modular garment
system and this is the square dress from
Reef initi the garment is constructed
from shaped modular pieces that can be
clicked and folded together so the
little squares to form many different
configurations the notion of modularity
provides contemporary designers with an
efficient approach to the use of
materials and resources and its design
enables the wearer to actively engage
with its creation without the need to
discard or disrupt the entire garment
the component pieces can be removed for
easy laundering so you only need to
launder certain sections you can repair
or replace bits as a when they need
replacing and so it's considered value
additive value added while being
competitive on price and in this case it
offers benefits to both the consumer and
the environment while designers can
employ strategies during production to
improve the wearer's relationship with
fashion unforeseen problems that arise
during garment use typically rely on the
moral and ethical decisions of the
wearer repairing damaged clothes helps
reduce the amount of textile waste going
to landfill and in clothing there are
many techniques that can be used to mend
and hide damage however in dress in
costume history wearing repaired
clothing usually was a signifier of
financial hardship particularly when the
repair was visible so you could see it
and this is a notion that has continued
to influence contemporary thinking about
garment repair although some consumer
groups have a general enthusiasm for
repairing damaged garments there is an
established cultural belief system that
promotes the need for invisibility in
clothing repair which usually requires a
high level of technical skill we did a
study at Sheffield Hallam about two
years ago on this and almost 82
sent of survey respondents had a
preference for invisible garment repairs
and yet of the majority of the
respondents or i should say the majority
of the respondents i'll say actually
everyone who filled in a survey did not
have the technical skill to carry out
the invisible repair work so immediately
to us there was a clear barrier to
engagement and so creative approaches to
visible mending could offer benefits in
that they may help whereas reconnect
with mending practices and while at the
same time they mate may help society
overcome the perceived difficulty or
stigma associated with wearing visibly
repaired clothing more radically perhaps
we should question whether repair has to
take place at all as a society it could
be timely to suggest that there's a need
to accept the clothing will age and that
this in itself may be positively or it
may positively signify a valued
imperfect relationship between wearer
and garment garment designs that make
use of deflective devices such as
intentional stains rips and tears and
holes provide the fashion designer with
the opportunity to develop clothes that
embrace future damage leaving it
untouched and unnoticed actually in some
cases to some extent this has been
previously seen before in fashion some
of us in the room might remember in the
1980s there was a phenomenon for damaged
vintage levi 501 jeans which retailed at
a heart far higher price than the newly
manufactured product so perhaps then
garments can accrue value through their
associations with the wearer and that
wear and tear could evidence this value
what's up sorry and so the approaches
that I've tried to discuss in the last
few slides point towards a need for the
fashion industry to explore and consider
approaches that may help shift and
transform attitudes and behaviors
towards
Garmin's they attempt to bridge the gap
between the designer in the consumer
which I will say is enormous currently
which in turn may help reduce or avoid
some of the impacts associated with
production and consumption the fashion
aesthetic is important in the success of
sustainable fashion because it can
provide the operation designer with the
opportunity to challenge fashions social
norms and I guess this is the thing that
excites me the most through creative
interventions designers can encourage
consumers to become active participants
with fashion garments the role of the
owner then is goes beyond that basic
position of consumer and becomes one of
an actively engaged wearer and so from
this position we can begin to motivate
wearers and designers to better care for
and about garments and perhaps more
consciously consider the impact that
fashion has on society and the
environment thank you
okay so i am going to take a radically
different approach to this entire
project here i want to suggest that my
concern here is oh you just just enjoy
that so my concern is not limited to the
products of Taylor's cobblers and
haberdashers I want to think of fashion
as a much broader category with in
everyday life and so we might think of
all sorts of products that come in and
go out of fashion and I want to so I
want to talk about this phenomenon of
fashion in a much broader way it seems
to me there may well be some purely
utilitarian products in the world like
screwdrivers but i think that the vast
majority of things that folks in the
industrialized world by can have the
characteristic of being fashionable or
unfashionable one obvious direction as a
philosopher to turn when put things are
put in that way is to ask but what kind
of characteristic is this being
fashionable and I'm not actually going
to take up that question today but I
think it's an interesting one so if
we're asked about ethical making is that
we were asked to do on this panel I
think a first impulse may well be to do
what Allison just did so I'm going to go
through that not at all because you just
heard a great paper about that and I
want to say I think these are really
important questions but they really may
well arise too late if we're thinking
about ethical making because the product
itself may be ethically dubious so
before asking how should something be
made one may well first need to ask
should it be made at all some cases I
think
are clear we can imagine a minimal
minimally packaged household nuclear
device made entirely of recycled
materials by well compensated laborers
from a historically oppressed group and
most of us I think would agree that in
such a case the question of ethics arose
long before questions of design and
manufacturing and that such a product
shouldn't have been made at all but
maybe such a case is an exception I want
to suggest that the question of ethics
arises early in many many cases perhaps
even in the majority of cases most
products by their very existence in
existence that is caught up in a matrix
of market forces advertising and
journalism which work together to create
desires may well raise our ethical
hackles maybe most goods aren't so good
at all and to see why that maybe we need
to discuss function so I want to suggest
that there are at least two functions
that objects can play the first of these
i'm going to call object function and
the second i'm going to call culture
function and so if we need an object
function objects like knives are made to
cut things bicycles are made to
transport people and stuff pens and
pencils are made to write culture
function is a second much vaguer
function having to do with the function
that the objects play in some sort of
cultural milieu so let me give you an
example of this the Yemeni John BIA
which is broadly found throughout the
Arabic world is a traditionally
manufactured curved knife as a knife it
is intended to cut things and cut people
actually as a weapon but it functions
within Yemeni culture as a marker of
male adulthood and of social status and
so the more ornate the knife the higher
your status or the higher the greater
the signification of yours
at us and I want to claim that this
culture function is entirely distinct
from the function as a knife because
many other objects could fulfill this
culture function just as well and if we
look at other cultures we can see things
that indicate status maturity and the
like which are not lives right in some
cases such as that of a prayer book or a
hymnal the object function and the
culture function may be difficult to
distinguish the object function in such
cases is to play a cultural role when
we're talking about culture functions I
think we can distinguish further between
formal and informal culture functions so
a formal culture function is
characterized by the objects clear place
in a culture or subculture a Catholic
prayer book or a Red Sox hat has a
cultural function that is clearly linked
with the practices of Roman Catholicism
or the practices of Red Sox Nation
remove from that cultural context the
book or hat loses its cultural function
an informal culture function is harder
to pin down it's more mobiletrans
poseable temporarily fleeting perhaps a
bandana or a style of sneakers or jeans
indicating group membership but there's
no sort of formal working out of what
that function is so formal culture
functions may change only slowly over
time often only as the result of some
formal mechanism informal culture
functions can arise and pass away with
great rapidity saying that something is
in fashion indicates the objects current
informal culture function unlike with
religion states universities and
corporations all of which formally
designate the culture functions of
objects such as flags logos particular
books and crests there is no formal
fashion process there is no legislative
body board of directors or trustees or
council of elders who decide what is in
or
out a fashion further unlike corporate
logos or not some national flags which
change only quite rarely together
there's actually this is going on in New
Zealand right now what it is to be in
fashion changes quite quickly even
overnight to be fashionable requires
thus that one constantly have one's eyes
open and one's ears to the ground and be
ready to adapt so what does this mean
well to me it means that fashion is what
we might think of as built-in
obsolescence with a twist so built-in
obsolescence we all know was a form of
deliberately sloppy engineering or
manufacturing to produce shorter-lived
products a deliberate failure of object
function the genius of fashion is that
no such engineering work is required
products that become susceptible to the
logic of fashion need to be replaced
even though they continue to fulfill
their object functions perfectly well
the logic of fashion is that one
replaces objects when they fail to
fulfill their culture function not when
they fail to fulfill their object
function pure fashion objects have only
culture function and no object function
things some of the I'm now going to date
myself things like chia pets or leashes
for non-existent dogs
I loved those right and other fat items
come and go with the winds of fashion
fulfilling no discernible function
object function along the way so the
logic of fashion is that culture
function overrides object function so
let me just give you a few examples
we're going to see if the internet
actually works here oh it's on my screen
that's lovely all right well now I have
to figure out how to get back what I was
going to show you hopefully um was if
you read the real estate column in The
New York Times they have a couple of
slide shows every week of properties
that are available for sale and every
week at least one of them has a calm a
you know pros and cons icon of the
property that either the kitchen or one
or more of the bathrooms need to be
updated and what I had here was a
picture of an absolutely pristine early
2000 kitchen which needs to be replaced
not because its object function can't be
fulfilled but because it's out of style
we see this also in clothing of course
or in cars I know there are people who
lease cars forever you know you have
never you need a new car every three
years I think your car probably still
works after three years but it doesn't
look right anymore right alright so we
see here a clear willingness to replace
still functional objects or collections
of objects because they no longer
fulfill their culture function to be
sure while middle-class folks can afford
to replace their clothes and to keep to
keep up with fashion's demands one may
well have to be significantly better off
to be able to do so with one's car or
kitchen on a regular basis and this
point brings us to the heart of fashion
fashion is about class and I want to
think of class not merely as an economic
term but as a cultural term in the way
to adorn
things about class or Pierre Bourdieu
thinks about class as an aesthetic term
you demonstrate your membership in a
particular class through your aesthetic
decisions and as fashion trends tickle
trickle down words so that poorer people
can look like richer people the richer
people have to move on or the more
stylish people have to move on in order
to indicate that they are ahead of the
trends right all right so
environmentally fashion is a phenomenon
with multiple pernicious consequences it
encourages wasteful consumption it
drives people to throw away things they
already have and buy things they don't
need since products are all made out of
materials plus energy this unnecessary
consumption results both in despoliation
through resource extraction and
pollution whether local or global
socially though fashions victims tend to
be poor and women the poor may feel
pressured to spend money they don't have
or can't afford in order to change their
appearances right um women spend far
more time and money on fashion than men
do whether we're speaking of clothing
makeup or home redesign projects we're
still beauty beauty norms take a far
greater toll on women's health requiring
diets depilation and even surgeries
because even your body is now something
which is open to the whims of fashion
and of course although more and more men
are falling into this as well it has
historically been much more of a
pressure on women so even for those with
the resources we might think that the
time and money invested in being
fashionable surely could be turned to
some other hopefully more useful purpose
I suppose in some cases it could be
turned to less useful purposes I am
sanguine however about our being able to
address the logic of fashion at least
not without massive social restructuring
which might be beyond us but let me just
if i have time investigate 53 minutes
a few options of ways that people might
respond to this and the first to think
about it anyway the Allison did is sort
of an individual response right how my I
as an individual do this and so we might
here at this this is my favorite part I
get to quote Coco Chanel so Coco Chanel
famously said that fashion passes and
but style remains and so maybe that
observation is a way forward her idea
style true style is timeless and thus
immune to the logic of fashion I'm
skeptical style is a further distinction
in response to the logic of fashion
style can be a conservative response to
the nouveau riche promulgated by the
aristocracy who famously said money can
always buy the new and the trendy but
real style can only be acquired by means
of good breeding a contemporary view of
style might insist that style is a sign
of some sort of individual aesthetic
some sort of ascetic janessa qua right
we talk about this person is style and
this person doesn't if that's the case
that style is self-expression maybe it's
also a kind of capitalist phenomenon
just like fashion in either case of
course the option to have style is
foreclosed to those who don't already
have it unlike fashion it which at least
has a veneer of democratic accessibility
all you need is money style is
inaccessible to those who don't already
have it one further option might be not
to care what others think in matters
aesthetic a gift which seems to be more
widely distributed amongst academics
than any other segment of the population
given the cultural forces at play this
seems to me to be a non-starter for most
people indeed it's hard to see how the
logic of fashion is something one as an
individual can avoid so maybe what we
need is some sort of societal response
given the pernicious consequences
discussed above
exacerbating gaps between the wealthy
and the poor coercing the poor into
buying things they don't need and can't
afford impacting women more than men and
the environmental destruction perhaps
this is a problem that needs some sort
of social response but what would it
look like to take on fashion politically
one might imagine some sort of social
movement to make unstylish nuh school I
think those are hipsters right um but
that's just another fashion trend right
and like other fashion trends it too
will pass mm-hmm how to take on fashion
if it is indeed a problem from a policy
perspective is harder to see all right
this is a problem with a lot of moving
parts we would have to talk about
problems of growth and employment
because what happens when people buy
things is that jobs are created they
might not be good jobs but there are
jobs we might have to talk about
perceived improvements in lifestyle we
might have to talk about people's
freedom of choice and do we want the
government coming in and saying you
can't do this right so one could imagine
higher consumption taxes or some sort of
invasive government agency the fashion
the actual literal fashion police right
but these seem to be non-starters
although at least the higher and
consumption tax I would endorse their a
non-starter here part of the problem is
for me the current societal commitment
to ever higher consumption in part as a
driver of economic growth makes any sort
of societal response to the issues here
discussed highly unlikely so when you
talk about one more thing and then I'll
be done maybe designers and producers
could respond to this and I really
wanted to talk about this because in
park us were here right um so is there
anything designers and producers can do
about the logic of fashion right our
designers at liberty to ask the question
should it be made at all by the time
designers come on the scene there is
often already and at least tacit
decision to design and then hopefully
produce some product producers of course
are in the business of producing and pay
designers and engineers to make that
production possible it seems as if the
question that can arise the questions
excuse me that can arise for any of
these groups are more along the lines of
how should this be produced or what
materials would be most ethical to use
or how should we source said materials
yet all of these are questions that come
too late taking on fashion it turns out
may turn out to be a problem too big for
designers thank you
ok
we witness bitter poverty and
persecution driving people into the
waves they're thirsty bodies flood
another shoreline a shoreline to be
shared but which no one dares a new life
intercepted and turned away and their
darkness is panic we witness waters
monstrous and thick iron clad bodies
navigate the Riptide spilled with
viciously good intentions not upset
without regret and all hoping to protect
a national story from foreign spaces of
emptiness and their darkness is
ferocious we witness industrial success
the anxiety of changes seasons fall into
emptiness life ordered for dramatic
effect its harmony turns dissonant but
beautiful nonetheless a dice throw
plunges the future into unbearable
nothingness and it's darkness is
inexhaustible imagine a people neither
blindfolded or kidnapped by
fundamentalists opportunists terrorists
or capitalists standing in defiance
amidst the dust and debris of hate
speech and gangsters outlawed by
compromises made in other lands and the
darkness falls silent imagine the
stature of a species never hunted
looking its killer straight in the eyes
or a warrior dragging the secrets of war
through the trapdoor and the darkness
it's booming so now what here Frederick
Jamison sobering dictum one that in
typically spirited fashions lavage
excites becomes my theoretical point of
departure because Jamison critically
observes it seems to be easier to
imagine the end of the world than to
imagine the
of capitalism the political deadlock of
global capitalism aside the dictum puts
into question how imagination under
global capitalism works and to add to
Frederick Jamison and Slavs you jerk on
this point I'd go so far as to say that
under global capitalism political
imagination is increasingly taking
apocalyptic form an apocalyptic
political imagination justifies some of
the most brutal instances of capitalist
engagement a wrench reminds us the
Faculty of the imagination expands our
worldview allowing us to take on
another's viewpoint and in this way
imagination is central to realizing
pluralism unsurprisingly a rent views
the imagination as inherently political
because as she says it severs the ties
of identity based experience through
this unrestrained free play however as a
faculty faculty of representation one
that makes present to the mind what is
absent from sense perception a rent I
think skirts pasts its productive
potential so taking a rents connection
between imagination politics and linking
it to athletics I don't regard the
politics of imagination as inherently
expansive and emancipatory indeed a
political imagination can also be
reactionary and repressive and it all
depends on how it's put to work a
political imagination creatively engages
sociality to create contexts of
reciprocity as well as organizing and
coding to borrow from jeans to lose the
flows of desire and here delors doesn't
think of desire as a lack in the
Lacanian sense but desire is something
productive it connects bodies it
connects matter affects forces
ecosystems could be sort of thought of
as systems of desiring production so to
speak of the imagination as political
and aesthetic is both a general
assertion about how emancipatory
practices work and a theoretical
proposition that concerns the
transformative power of imagination to
reconfigure social relations so a
political imagination in the way that I
want to sort of develop it ever so
briefly here has three features first
it's a mode of distributing the sensible
in the way that jacques ranciere is to
talk about the politics of aesthetics
and second to borrow from Deleuze and
Guattari in their books a thousand
plateaus capitalism and schizophrenia
it's an act of deterritorialization and
re territorial ization so
deterritorialization breaks apart fixed
relations and re territorial ization re
fixes relations and thirdly to borrow
from multi Benjamin's remarkable little
essay on imagination it's a deforming
agent it's always referring to something
beyond itself so the aesthetic
mechanisms underwriting the exercise of
a political imagination is a
constellation of all three and it's
emancipatory or repressive exercise of
the political imagination depends I
think on some of the aesthetic
mechanisms that are employed whether
it's using a logic of reciprocity or
relationality or whether it's using the
logic of representation so in a
political sense I'm going to get this up
here imagination is not just the domain
of image production or the realm of
representation indeed the symbolic
primacy that representation holds in
democratic practices is discredited as
it obstructs from view the violent
structures Boing predict or political
practices the world over representation
functions as the practical standard for
democratic politics and by default it's
from the dominant political norm but the
logic of representation as Dorothea or
kowski has pointed out leaning on the
work of jill's dollars and feminist
philosophers like Elizabeth gross is a
static structure it hierarchically
orders space and time it represents
individuals and groups using
pre-established or even naturalized
standards and it functions by
establishing a fixed standard as the
norm or model so cases in point would be
you know the dichotomies of black versus
white man vs woman nature versus culture
reason versus unreason so an
emancipatory political imagination in
the way that i want to try to talk about
it here works by decolonizing that logic
of representation a relational aesthetic
complicates the neat and tidy
connections of a representational logic
the challenge of Emancipator ii politics
i think is how to decolonize the
different scales and modality of
imagination so that it works as a
relational rather than a
representational aesthetic so
relationality obviously I'm leaning a
little bit on Nicolas periods excellent
little book on relational aesthetics but
I'm trying to deepen and broaden how we
understand relationality so I'm using
you know people like de leurs and
Foucault and Rosie Brody and Antonio
negri and Michael harps work in this
particular area to think about
relationality as forces and effects and
energies and as these combine they form
particular kinds of investments some of
which can be Liberatore and some of
which can be emancipatory right so
relationality is central to the question
of how is change constituted is it from
this sort of anomalous position that
forms alliances which insight you know
to borrow from dollars and guitari
illicit unions such alliances create
assemblages that are neither those of
the family nor of religion nor of the
state and for this reason they're
inherently political in the
transformative sense of the term so I'm
suggesting a relational aesthetic can
constitute an emancipatory political
imagination because it uses the logic of
reciprocity that redistributes the field
of the sensible the Jaquan SIA was to
talk about and it does this by calling
forth forces in thought and experience
experience which are not the forces of
recognition but the powers of a
completely other model from an
unrecognized and unrecognizable terra
incognita to borrow from Giles delusion
difference and repetition so the very
act of distributing and redistributing
the sensible is for jacques ranciere
herron tlie political why because it
sets the limits of possibility for how
political subjectivity is thought and
practiced by demarcating
what's visible and what remains
invisible who is heard and who is
unheard what is thought and what is
unfort a relational aesthetic can
redistribute the sensible here by
reorganizing the social field and
bringing what was otherwise invisible
and inaudible into the light of day so
in this way relational aesthetics
introduces a hypothetical site of
creative production whereupon
alternative sociality is immobilized and
above all it destabilizes a subjects
position in grammar and language as much
as it smudges the contours of finite
political identities identity politics
rely in large part on a negative logic
using distinct classifications like
class race sexuality gender ethnicity
and so on and they they use those
distinctions to locate political
subjectivity and then hierarchically
distribute subjects throughout the
social field humanist values do not
drive how a relational is that it
constitutes political imagination so
unlike brewery odds book I'm not saying
its individual subjects who exercise
their powers of reason and moral
judgment to respond to the question of
change rather it's a poetic subject
transversally conditioned in this matrix
of reason and unreason humanity and
technology pragmatic thinking and
experimental dreaming not unlike what
Bray dottie calls the posthuman so in
particular humanist distinctions between
self and other subject object Center
margin nature culture are rendered
uncertain relational aesthetics can
therefore appeal to a collectivist
impulse harnessing the effective
energetic material and temporal gesture
registers of life in all its
unpredictable motion in a collective
effort to remake the world moreover
negative differences of black versus
white Muslim vs christian man vs woman
and so on and so forth are dismantled
because relationality operates
transversally and interdependent
to paraphrase braid Adi so a community
comes into being not just because of a
lack they collectively share such as the
resilient subject as my great friend
Brad Evans and Julian read transiently
critique through a shared vulnerability
as Rosie braids Adi dressed of
justifiably interrogate but this is a
community that's formed through acts of
collective imagining that operate across
multiple spaces various times and in a
variety of ways descending quietly the
event of us disappears but never
entirely unspoken frozen nothing left to
speak every time everything all in
succession and no crimson ribbon to tie
the every together that is except for
collective imaginings an emancipatory
political imagination plungers bodies
matter thinking and memory into a chaos
mas a composed chaos as de leurs and
guitari might say emphasizing micro
politics of relations as these inflict
and reorganize macro political relations
so an emancipatory political imagination
begins with a drive for co-creation
promiscuously combining matter duration
for sensation and bodies by forming
unholy alliances across space and time
it begins when making is considered
poetically eliciting wonder sensuality
and memory arousing anxiety and hope all
the while straddling a fine line between
danger and delight it begins with a
simple choice of making and yet an
emancipatory imagination proceeds not by
choice or even the will of a single
agent rather through an act of falling
falling out of habit and falling for the
lure of unfamiliarity
it begins by falling in love despite an
ability to choose otherwise as slovo
Dziedzic and shrek or Horvat have
recently pointed out if their fall
begins the moment absolute freedom is
suspended it's a moment when pre
personal forces connect with intellect
and together they succumb to the
productive motions of desire in all its
material and energetic intensity
imagination returns the sun's rays to
the lights of the night sky it recalls
the ghosts of yesterday hiding amidst
the shadows of the present and filling
the darkness of being amidst the
likeness of a spring shower pinpointing
the forest inside the trees imagination
emboldened the idiosyncratic and the
eccentric so one danger an emancipatory
political imagination faces is losing
its power to create sites of
socio-political struggle where micro
struggles can impact expand and
transform the public sphere the biggest
peril however lies not with the
imagination but in how it is put to work
whether or not the alternatives it
presents reproducers of fascistic or a
Liberatore investment of desire and like
any collective activity it always has
the potential to take the form of
ritualized violence imaginatively
connecting with the world creates
divergences from the norm and in making
new world's imagination remakes the
world thank
okay thanks very much oops so lots to
discuss their I could get things going
here by just making a few observations
here so my question to Adrian might be
in terms of the the rejection
observation about our inability to think
beyond capitalism I mean could it be
said that one of the problems with the
literature's that you draw from to
construct a political imagination is
that they themselves have been quite
divorced from material interests and
questions of material interests and that
if we if we are to go back to publix
publix whether Trump versus Sanders now
or other contexts I'm not just driven by
desire but they're driven by interests
and differential interests and material
propositions that could reground their
interests and that I and that one of the
problems with juju de leurs Foucault was
that there was this massive excavate
that there was this massive falling away
from giving specificity to how material
interests could be institutionally
wreath or so there's a lot there's a lot
in that question the first thing I want
to say is you know deleuze and Bray
Dottie and-and-and suavo are
materialists in a new sense and the the
way in which they think of materialism
is not purely in the Marxist sense of
economic relations but that's not to say
that they don't consider that so that's
the first point
me the second point I want to meet is
that I actually find it really helpful
the new approach that they have towards
materiality and the ways in which we
think about what's happening currently
in the American political landscape
which I think just gets more and more
atrocious every day it's it's shocking
but if you go back to a book by Marcos I
think it was the mass psychology of
fascism I think what's really
interesting about that book for me and
then thinking and it's a lot of thinking
behind this paper which is much longer
paper it's a keynote of 45 minutes so I
have to condense it quite dramatically
is that the social field is made up of a
variety of you know materiality is
broadly conceived not just economic
memories that are unconscious that are
lodged in the body bodies that all kind
of combine and as they combine they can
either combine in ways that are
emancipatory or Liberatore well they can
become incredibly fascistic so the great
point that came out of the mass
psychology of fascism was that it wasn't
just a problem of ideology it wasn't
just a problem of you know Hitler's new
socialist ideology it was actually that
the population invested in that as well
so what we end up there with that model
is you've actually got a really
interesting model that's about this sort
of you know struggle that's occurring
both at the ideological level and both
at the at the ground level of the masses
and that's what I'm sort of interested
in I'm interested in the ways in which
collective imagination is becomes us at
a lightning rod for these kinds of
anxieties some of them we can talk about
in terms of interests and material
interests in the Marxist economic sense
but I also think it's important to sort
of take on what we've learned from
psychoanalysis to sort of understand
what seems to be kind of irrational
it seems to kind of go against the grain
of everything that we think we stand for
but in actual fact it's always there
right and the benefit of dealers in this
is that when he talks about the realm of
eminence and the actual what's going on
right now has always been in our social
field it's just that it's actual izing
at the moment because of this this sort
of player horses that are can carry out
in the political sphere right yeah okay
so I'm just hungry we can tie your two
presentations linked in with this just
in the sense of how your understanding
fashion and the fashion aesthetic on at
one level there's a strong that there
could be a strong polarization between a
more pragmatic reform driven desire to
find levers for possible more just
outcomes in here and now and then more
of a positioning that's closer to
adrians maybe a little bit more
Frankfurt School tinged which is a more
skeptical but one thing that struck me
about your two talks is that where you
both ended up was actually not that far
apart as in you know at one point you
know that the in the first talk there
was a discussion about well maybe you
know particularly in terms of modular
flat fashion which struck me is
particularly interesting at this
understanding of a consumer as in
dialogue with and participating and
repurposing and self grounding you know
struck me as a very interesting sudden
radical twist to your your talk and have
opening up a very interesting political
imaginary and then you know at one point
you you almost seem to want a snuff out
fashion but but then we're left with a
dilemma that you know over the last 40
years some of the most powerful forces
for fashion haven't been the aristocrats
driving it down
the masses it's been mods and rockers
it's been you know Punk it's being
grunge it's being rap it's been you know
all manner of them vile subcultures from
below refusing to wear you know uniform
whether that's corporate uniform or you
know Maoist uniform or you know so so
and again that has been a slight attempt
to be an active participant before it
all becomes churn back in at the machine
so I'm just wondering whether it is
there a horizon of is there a horizon of
possibility here between you despite the
fact that you're quiet you came off
initially as quite sharply different no
I mean in your political imaginaries let
me draw out your political imaginaries
yeah yeah that was a very good question
oh good no it was just actually what's
quite interesting that obviously my
background is designed so I think like a
designer and I think about issues
through the perspective or lens should i
say of design but i think what has been
interesting is that in all my years of
working in sustainable fashion what I
constantly come across or are constantly
come as a block is the the argument from
the industry that they can't do anything
other than produce more products that
they can't they're not prepared to take
the risk to investigate other ways of
doing things because so much of their
money is tied up in producing things you
rightly pointed out actually Jonathan
about people will lose jobs if we stop
producing things and so this it suddenly
I mean of the fashion industry is a good
model in it for looking at this actually
because it is just so enormous and so
many people rely on their livelihoods
because of fashion products however you
know the other side of this is that we
end up
using so many resources that we create
so much ways to etc etc so there is
constantly a stumbling block as far as
an industry is concerned to explore
anything else the frustration from my
point of view is that actually there are
lots of different ways we could be doing
things quite easily but it's just nobody
all we prepared to take the risk and so
it's the lack of exploring risks or
innovation risks in a way that you know
would make a big change or every
difference would make would be really
beneficial but it's just this constant
block from an industry that is not
prepared to take those risks and I think
that's probably a very I don't know how
we overcome that actually and but like I
think one of the things actually
Jonathan still reminded me of it was
that one of the things I'm really
interested in is the idea of products
and services which I know industrial
designers have been exploring for some
time fashion industry has not been
exploring this at all and am willing to
do it at all and you know I keep we have
a company in the UK called John Lewis
which some people may know of rather
similar to Marks and Spencers in a way
it's very easy for stores to embrace
hiring models leasing garments repairing
things all within the sort of retail
concept incredibly easy to do but of
course if you offer those things it
stops people buying more products so we
seem to go round in circles
unfortunately so I don't know what it
will take to shift things to be quite
honest I'll come to you and say I'm a
very good question and in some of my
earlier work on consumption I I talked I
think way too much about individuals and
individual decision-making and I try to
investigate that actually using the work
of two lives in cotati to talk about
desire and the way that desire structure
subjectivity and and I've become more
and more convinced that one has to talk
about the social forces and the social
forces that construct subjectivity and
that becomes a lot harder against the
background of American culture in
particular because of our commitment to
a certain way of thinking about politics
and our kind of liberal commitments that
we don't have to talk about formations
of subjectivity because subjects are
already given and so I I mean I actually
think I'm probably closer to a trans
position that it might have seemed in
this talk the other thing I want to say
is about I think I made a brief mention
in passing about a like hip-hop or
street fashion and I think that that's
true that there are ways in which
fashion especially in the post-world war
two period has had function I mean
hesitant to call it as a form of
resistance but has functioned in a way
that has been at least in its initial
moments resistant to the dominant forces
of the economy and the dominant cultural
forces that we live under and what's
interesting is that in and I'm not a
historian I'm not a sociologist I'm not
you know I have
but but but my sense is that in in each
of those cases those those styles which
originally come out of the streets or
comma out of minority communities or
come out of oppressed classes or
whatever it is tend either they just
disappear or they get taken up by the
mainstream fashion industry the
political content is removed and what is
left is a look right you know and that
is certainly what happened for example
with punk in the 1970s I mean punk was a
form of very angry politics that was
very opposed to to the need to get a job
the need to to to have money and the
like and but that what remained was
radio stations and record labels and
clothing manufacturers making a lot of
money out of the look of punk right and
the political you know sandanista became
sandanista became an album and and so
it's I mean I think you know part of
what I really liked about what Adrian is
doing is right is that these these these
um these pastas I do think we need to
talk about imagination imaginations
incredibly important we have to
recognize that the social forces against
change are incredibly powerful and
it is and that they're inevitably going
to to work against whatever is is
bubbling up from below i just want to i
should i'd like to add to that so in
both my last two books with hijacking
sustainability with MIT and the wrath of
capital with colombia i was very
critical of the notion that our politics
somehow has to be sort of waged at the
level of consumption given that the
consumer paradigm is part of the bloody
problem right and neoliberalism
functions according to sort of
fracturing the social landscape and
turning us all into individuals who all
compete with one another so if our
politics rests upon the assumption that
we consume better which is not to say
that we shouldn't i'm not suggesting you
all go out and buy SUVs instead of a
hybrid right that's not what I'm getting
at but our politics can't rely upon that
because that's also part of the problem
so it acts as a displacement activity so
I feel really good if i drive around in
my hybrid car right I'm yeah but that's
really only a tip of the iceberg I have
you know I recycle I do that religiously
right but I'm fully aware of the fact
that that's not really doing the kind of
thing that we need to do and that we
need to get at a much deeper level and
that what concerns me is that if we
purport that that's where the political
lies then we don't think about the much
deeper difficult problem around global
capitalism and endless economic growth
that is the problem and then we start to
ask all then how does politics engage
with that and there seems to be two
dominant strains that have emerged the
the sort of the rosy and I've talked to
us about this is a conundrum right
there's the the braid aati hai negri de
leurs strain which says we work from
within and we've got to change it from
within to produce an outside from within
but ilysm right now the problem with
that is capitalism capital accumulation
works by appropriating the limits that
are presented to capital and we have
countless examples you've just provided
it there with the punk movement right
where it operates as an outside it's
still inside because it's part of the
music industry and so on and so forth
but then it gets appropriated or you go
the other way which is what Slovo
Dziedzic is purporting and Badger and
that camp right and slavo would say to
me well Adrian you know we've got to
come up with a dialectic so negative
right The Hague alien model right
produce like create an outside that
interrupts capital as its leather the
Stila same freakin problem because
capitals going to also appropriate that
limit so personally the way I'm trying
to sort of think about it now is that
our politics has to become far more
strategic and we need to deepen the
concept of solidarity building beyond
issue-based politics so the climate
justice movement Bill McKibben you know
wonderful friend he would argue we've
got to create solidarity's across you
know indigenous struggles and you know
black lives matter and so on and so
forth I agree with that but I think we
need to deepen how we understand some
solidarity building and actually think
about solidarity building as different
kinds of political practices and
strategies so that on the one hand
you're working from the inside to create
an outsider when that's starting to get
appropriated you switch strategies and
you start to produce the dialectic and
you work from the outside we don't need
to be purist about our political
strategies but the big beast is really
capital accumulation and all of this and
how that functions people
yeah I was curious to hear you to think
about how you put various images or
cultural practices to work in your own
talk with the visuals and especially the
use which when I mentioned of original
Regina Jose Galindo or jarred or just
I'd love to hear you make use of those
with your descriptive like okay you just
like a few oh don't do that terrible
memory 00 or I'll get all flipped out
yeah you don't want to send me flipped
out I can't keep my brain together at
the best of times as you know 80 they're
going everywhere alright so the images
yes now that's an interesting question
because when I get stuck when I'm
writing I usually go to contemporary art
to help me get through it or you know
experimental kind of indie style cinema
because it's something that just unlocks
my kind of brain and enables me to sort
of get in touch with both cognitive and
feeling and to sort of sensuously
grapple with something that's that I'm
responding to in a sort of modality of
outrage so the images that i'm showing
and not meant to be sort of these
literal connections but they're sort of
like poetic resonances with actually how
I'm sort of thinking about something and
they're they're often sort of i would
call them philosophical research
documents they're my my thinking in this
other way but it's not something that
I'm directly speaking to in the way that
an art historian might necessarily do
right I'm not going to sit down and talk
about Glinda's piece in great detail I
mean what struck me about that
particular work do you know that work
yeah yeah I mean that just so you know
talking about sort of memory traces and
the distribution of the social field of
the sensible and here she is it's sort
of vulnerable body in a public
place exposed where people can come and
piss on her a mighty memory and marina
not Marina Abramovic is work but Yoko
Ono's work where you could rip things
offer was it that was it yeah yeah sorry
yes I'm not really with the names right
but visually I can remember them and it
it was sort of similar in that way and
then you know to talk about the social
field and the desires of the social
field and what's repressed and when we
give licensed to do x y&z how people act
upon that right and that the majority of
the people that came and pissed on her
were men right and here she was you know
making a reference to the way in which
the Latina female body has been sort of
the violence that that body has incurred
and has been a sort of repository of
violence in Latin America here it was
being reenacted again so the memories of
the past was still part of that social
field and they are in that instance just
activated that so I found that was very
interesting as I was thinking about
these issues of the social field and as
a sort of form of desiring production
and Ford alerts for social is not just
individuals it is a modality of desiring
production and how it finds investment
and sometimes it's in these really kind
of violent and repressive ways and other
times it's more expensive yeah
picking up some of the maybe some of the
questions I'll address as I'm speaking
extemporaneously next panel so
especially on the question fashion and I
could help disagree and just whatever
but that's fine so logic fashion that is
but I want to kind of get to a point
about the question of making and one a
couple of the things that have been said
that strike me as quite distinct or
maybe even oppositional some of them
were already pointed out of course
they're stopping making just stop
designing and kind of revert to a world
of which there are no commodities and
then of course no jobs etc but then
there is Adrienne para you're saying
quite eloquently okay so making is this
kind of site for creative activity for
imagination to kind of rethink think the
new the possible and of course then that
suggests that making is not just about
the cumulation of stuff about about a
reimagining of the the kind of social
and political and cultural networks in
which we live and and produce and then
Alison you mentioned something actually
just at the air in the discussion
industry is not willing to take
innovative risks and I think that that's
another kind of question within making
that suggests that making of course
doesn't want me to use these to tear it
deterritorialization re territorial
ization sort of analogy industry put so
much capital into its methods of
production to the means of production
that it refuses then or like has to kind
of insist upon as long as it can extract
capital from that process it insists on
retaining the same creative
possibilities as long as it can until
it's forced to by some outside force
actually talked about inside outside by
some outside force to change and so here
maybe its global warming and all the
sudden policy is saying you have to
change the way
you're working so I'm not exactly sure
where I'm going with this comment but I
I guess I feel like something in the in
the nuancing of making first of all that
it's that what a creative act is I mean
obviously not all making is a creative
act not all or even creative acts or
themselves not necessarily Liberatore
and it you've suggested as much right
there sometimes oppressive or
restrictive but I think that it what's
really important for me and my work to
understand is the way in which something
can start to become as it kind of mishi
ated in this kind of rhizomatic creative
drive to kind of explode and d
territorial eyes and then but along the
way and ones never able to determine
when and where that happens it quite
quickly re territory Eliza's and it
quite quickly the apparatus the
protocols confirm and reaffirm Andrey
entrench the creative process so it's I
guess I'm maybe the final question if I
have one after this comment is how does
how does making I guess making is as an
aesthetic act is is so yeah it's just
like well okay it can go anywhere it's
not it's not restricted to creativity
and it's not restricted to stuff
commodity production it's it's like
confidence constantly floating between
one and the other or actually say always
moving into its other into its opposite
and that dialectical passion I'm just
going to say actually you just remind I
thought your question was really good
actually because it did remind me of
something that I think is incredibly
important particularly in terms of
fashion production and also is the style
of fashion or the look of fashion is
that I think the fashion industry's
underestimated the future potentials of
DIY and open access actually and I think
to be quite honest that's an enormous
threat to the fashion industry which is
continuing to do the same
thing same ways they've totally
unprepared for that change and the
totally unprepared for the new startups
that are coming through those sort of
particular ways of producing or making
they're also not recognizing the
interest from consumer groups themselves
in making things for themselves and also
that that will actually bring with it a
personal aesthetic that is not coming
down from a an industry perspective it's
not being driven by the industry and I
think that is something that it may be
going on in other industries I don't
know but I think very much fashion and
fashion production the aesthetics of
fashion is hugely under threat by the
consumer and that the possibilities
through this open access and DIY making
I think village toss that means you see
any analogy with music industry are
hugely yes hugely that that's a really
good point actually because you know
yeah yeah no that's true and I actually
wonder whether that will be the
instigation for change in the industry I
mean that it's interesting when you from
my perspective I'm really interested in
smaller companies they're small at the
moment and they might be working as
social enterprises I mean one of the
things that I've always struggled with
is in fashion industry is why is it
considered successful based purely on
money you know it's refreshing to come
across companies that make enough to
make a living and they're happy doing
what they're doing and they have a
consumer base that they're happy to work
with and that's enough you know there's
not a drive to reduce volumes of stuff
or build up you know a large consumer
group in a way so it's quite refreshing
when you can come across companies that
are willing to do things differently or
a meter makers that are willing to do
things differently but I think you're
quite right as soon as enough do think
the internet is
an incredible resource that perhaps
fashion designer fashion design
companies haven't quite realized the
potential of yet and actually this
brings me back to education in that I
would look at the my discipline and even
in my own Institute they are teaching
fashion design the same way that I
learnt as a student in the 80s there is
no recognition that actually we should
be teaching our students for future ways
of designing making and using and we
don't do that at all and I'll be honest
that's that's sheffield hallam that's my
job gone but but you know I think it's
interesting if we look at our you know
that it's an education is a starting
point actually for and you know I think
of all those fashion designers going to
work in the industry and I see my own
graduates go out with the same lack of
knowledge that I had as a student in the
80s and they're going out and
perpetuating the same problems so I
think education could do an awful lot to
completely radically overhaul the way
that designers and I love the idea that
actually consumers can be designed it's
not professional designers so I think
there's an opportunity for education is
designed up to it I mean you guys know
is the essential problem we have here
that we play such enormous kind of
possibilities the agency of designers
but we take your views as a hub
designers actually
once we call and then we don't even have
a configured on design education which
allows for the literacies or
imaginations that we if I going to say
one thing about that i mean i think if
you want to talk about making we have to
differentiate between different sorts of
making different ways of making the the
social conditions under which making
takes place how the making is organized
right and that it's a to talk about that
well you know one of the buzz words of
the last five years is artisanal right
is there to talk about artisanal making
as opposed to industrial manufactory I
are two very very different things right
and that sorry well I mean if you let
you know it depends on what it is that
we're manufacturing right but you know
that the the the two great I mean
industrialization is driven by
industrialization under the under
capitalist social organization while I
sound like sent to doctrinaire Marxist
which I'm not it is driven by desire to
accumulate capital which is then pushes
you to produce things more and more and
more efficiently which is what yields
division of labor which which is what
yields production lines and the like
right and so if you work in actually you
didn't probably doesn't even know this
the birth henry ford is not in fact the
inventor of the production line the
production line was born in the
meatpacking industry in Cincinnati as
the unproductive and it was driven by
the taking a part of animals but if you
take work of making and you divide it up
into smaller and smaller and smaller and
smaller discrete tasks
you're talking about a very very very
different thing right i mean you know
probably the most the most famous
illustration of this in the hip in
popular culture is in Charlie Chaplin's
modern times right and the guy whose job
is there is to stand there and just
tighten these two bolts over and it's
very funny and very right right but that
to talk about that form of making is a
very very different thing from the form
of making of somebody who you know a
traditional luthier who starts with with
wood and and glue and and makes an
instrument out of it we've got four
minutes or so 45 you can draw in as many
people as possible yeah and then down
back you tricked you have a bunch
together just because if you asked her
sensation
i miss that big
not getting rid of representation all
together but the logic of representation
in and of itself on its own is an
identity-based construct and as an
identity-based construct then we're
stuck with a sort of static model so by
introducing relationality into it yes
you can engage aspects of representation
but at the same time as you engage it
you dismantle it in the sand by the same
token so that's where I'm coming from
with that and I do think you know the
connection between representation and
recognition like if we were to look at
someone like Nancy phrases work where
she recognizes that you know identity
politics in the feminist movement is the
very thing that's made it complicit with
capitalism her recent will not recent
but an essay she wrote a few years ago
in new left review was very interesting
in that respect so she's her kind of
political philosophy is a combination of
recognition politics representation and
redistribution right so feminist
movement with its focus on identity
politics let go of the redistributive
aspect right so I do think that these
things need to brought be brought into
connection with other things that's all
I'm saying so I just wanted to ask more
about specifically to Alison about the
one image that you had with the martinez
felt ova and the Patagonia of the
recycled upcycled jacket not being
understood and the Patagonia being the
the more well-known commercial branding
and also speaking to John what you had
said about how the punk area era came
out of a cultural you know need that all
of that fashion came from that type of
era and I'm thinking that the one
element that's missing is the futuring
or the trend forecasting you know idol
court is a very well-known trend
forecaster who came back to the US
because she felt that the foul
schools weren't teaching it right and
and I agree with that that we're not
doing enough with futuring and trend
forecasting to understand that these
situations or these types of eras or
these types of fashion really come from
someplace and they're really actually
created through what's happening either
environmentally or through ethical
stance of things like bringing attention
to how the workers are treated to you
know politics all of these positionings
actually give the rise to a certain type
of fashion trend and i think that the
futuring aspect of what's being
discussed as a panel might need to go a
little bit deeper and of course probably
for a whole nother symposium but it's
something that i think should be at the
highlight of this discussion more so is
the futuring and understanding that
trend forecasting actually isn't just
what's coming down the runway now it's
come back from things that are happening
in North Korea and how that affects
fashion so I'm challenging you know
anyone on the panel just speak to more
towards that type of conversation of
futuring and research in that village
site because we've reached time can baby
say okay we left the audience at the
last word that's a big discussion we can
come back to that in later panels as I
can ask us later okay so much all all
fantastic three panelists are hoping you
can continue discussion
