just have a have a few responses from
Lily Herman and Camille and let's just
open this up to a chat about some of the
things that were raised by like pill so
Camille Jonah take it away thank you so
much for sharing attempts to bring
economic democracy to your country it's
really inspiring to hear some of the
practical stories of workers sharing
their creativity and participating in
the process of design I grew up a
working class a kidd son of immigrants
in this country and for me this is very
personal because I grew up with my
father who worked for as a construction
worker for over 30 years discussing over
dinner how he would give advice to the
civil engineers about what they were
doing wrong and how he be often ignored
and you know the story would go on until
the self-fulfilling prophecy came true
and and some of his suggestions were
finally relented too but it's it's not
unusual for us working class people
immigrants women people of color to be
seen as as ignorant to be seen as not
smart enough to make these decisions
around our lives and our surroundings so
I'll just share one more thing about my
mom my mom
for example worked 40 years as a garment
worker doing piecework and in some of
your writings you talked about how you
were able to engage with workers and
deal with some of the skepticism zuv new
technology and through participation you
were able to transform that into an
opportunity for creativity and for
something new my mother after 41 years
of sewing labels on women's dresses in a
union shop was introduced to something
called just time it's part of lean
production and theoretically it makes a
lot of practical sense for workers the
idea that if you you can reduce the
amount of time between the product and
the consumer you can save and warehouse
space you can really that work toward
conservation but in the economic context
of the United States the interests of my
mother wasn't at hand that wasn't the
interest wasn't of the workers to
introduce lean production so what it did
was decimate and to unionize this
workforce so for me many of the insights
that you've brought up bring up some of
the challenges as organizers as labor
organizers commune or ganai zehrs for
example when you talked about how your
relationship to the workers was well
received because you were nice I worked
with a lot of activists who think being
right is enough they think facts are
enough are sufficient and we have to
often look at the long-term goals how do
we actually create relationships and
dialogue and how do we subvert this idea
of banker knowledge the popular
education approach where there's experts
and the unknowing masses
so I really appreciate that point that
you highlighted how its relational if we
want to transform the economy we we need
to figure out how we can learn together
and I had a question related to the
tension between working and academic
context and what people are paying good
money to learn right certain skills
which are valuable and specialized and
the idea of trying to implement a
participatory model that in some ways
levels the playing field and creates a
participatory mechanism and you
discussed a little bit about that
tension of trying to focus on product
versus process profit versus a
community-based model but if you have
any advice of howdy how have you
sustained your career build new projects
despite sometimes the economic tension
between your interests and the interests
of those that might fund projects that
would not really be your priority sure
so the tension between the economic
interests of creating these
project-based profit driven processes
and how have you grappled with building
consensus support with an academic
environment for a new way a way that is
participatory a way that is
community-based you've been doing this
for a while and I feel like we can all
learn from ways that you've developed
that consensus and built allies in the
community and unions and in the
University it's don't you and well I
think my personal story in this is
not so interesting because I mean I'm a
white middle class professor that has
all these opportunities and I've been
economically secure even if the projects
doesn't come through and so on so so
that's kind of but the way I would like
to answer the question is that I think
that for design schools in general there
there is a potential that I should start
here and say I think I think
professional designers have a very
important role to play in these projects
together with Leigh designers but there
is I think a responsibility for the
schools to change their curriculum to
prepare this the professional design
students students to be able to deal
with these kind of issues so if we look
at like science schools like centers and
Martin in London some extent Parsons and
many of the Scandinavian design schools
there is a change in the curriculum not
throwing out the baby with about whether
where we had before but to start to
train or two or two to support a
repertoire of of co design practices and
I think I don't know if you think that
is a sufficient answer but I think that
actually the design schools make a
difference I think that if i look at
norwich of centers and martin am in
London as an example think they have
some fascinating projects and their
teachings it's you did some really
interesting thing that making the
shorter anything that would not be
professional enough in this or that a
specific part of the time but i think
they are they are a kind of designers
that will be able to do some of the work
that we're talking about here you know
thank you for that i want to come back
to that because that's that's hitting a
that's hitting home
um there were a number of points you
made that were very interesting to me
and it also reminded me of a personal
story that some of the people in the
room have heard but I wanted to say that
a lot of the work that I do excuse me no
it's okay it's just me but the work I do
with with students and alums and and
other faculty is in South Asia and in
South Asia and in Japan where I've also
gone to study this Sweden is really the
model Scandinavia is the model on how to
how to build cooperative communities how
to build cooperative decision-making how
to creatively reach across stakeholders
to to do really meaningful and
multi-dimensional responses to two
issues or design design problems that
they're framed that way so so it's
really fascinating for me to hear you
speak because everywhere I go the model
is always referred back to to Sweden so
and I was curious about a number of
things you said about when people try to
organize what the resistance to to those
participatory processes or cooperative
organizations might be I know that where
I've been working most recently
cooperatives are just about non-existent
they were driven out by the government
who took over control of the the
initiatives and and this is right next
door to India where where cooperatives
are booming and where cooperatives are
multi-sector and are quite effective and
in Japan they're even more
multi-dimensional and multi sectors so
I'm personally very intrigued about that
but then
and reading some of your writings and
listening to tonight and having you go
through the timeline that was quite
personal I'd recognize those early
computers but but I was wondering
whether you think that it was there's
been this progression of different forms
of inquiry and different attitudes
toward participate patient but I'm
wondering whether there's something in
the earlier periods that you feel we
still have to learn from in terms of
what were the questions being asked I
certainly feel that so the personal
story i just want to mention briefly is
um that I grew up in a community in the
woods where there was a university major
in that was a major university in name I
don't think anybody would have held it
up as you know the the avant-garde in
inquiry at that time but because it was
in the woods and because it had some
sort of a name there was a period and
exactly coincided with a period you
started to talk about or a little
earlier was really 1960 6261 when a
group of computer of mathematicians were
brought in from Princeton and they
developed the basic computer language
and so it was Dartmouth College and so
they were coming up with the computer
language that allowed the personal
computer to come into existence at the
same time that they came there and this
is we've had a lot of discussions lately
about how innovation actually happens
and this this whole focus now on
innovation labs and how people are
trying to micromanage the process of
innovation and and design in a way that
a lot of us feel isn't possible so so
what I'm trying to explain is what the
ecosystem was that emerged at that time
so we had
kemeny and and Kurt's at Dartmouth doing
the computer work then there was an
engineer brought in from UCLA who
believed that design was a critical part
of engineering and that to actually to
get out of the theoretical in into
actually making a difference in the
world you had to be learning through
doing and he also believed very much an
entrepreneurship so he pulled together a
group of engineers who were
out-of-the-box thinkers and just said go
to it he let them loose nobody was
looking it was in the backwoods of New
Hampshire and and then the third
component was and this was a few years
later was that the Meadows's who were
the the systems dynamics people came
from Harvard and MIT and and they began
their explorations into organizational
management and then to into again
systems and and how they behave and how
they evolve and what the last component
so we have these three groups all
becoming very active and nobody was
watching and they were doing their thing
and what happened was they burst out of
the Academy and they burst into the
local community which was still in 1960
a community that was coming out of what
it had been in the 30s under Roosevelt
it was one of the target areas for a lot
of the New Deal programs it was
considered still an impoverished area
that part of New Hampshire Vermont and
and the people who broke out of the
Academy felt that there was indigenous
knowledge that was as valuable as
academic knowledge and they pulled those
people in and created a partnership with
them and I would say that it that it
evolved into a full partnership and so
you had these
spinning circles within particular
arenas of inquiry that were crashing
into each other infecting each other and
then the fact that it was an inclusive
society that was being built and this is
now being studied it's been studied for
years now in business schools and in
schools you know in programs on planning
and development as one of the case
studies of you know where it really
worked and it worked it was an accident
in a funny way it was an accident but
the environment was right for letting
these people have free reign and so I'm
curious about these two things you know
how do we how do we promote how do we
address these issues of social equity
and of you know creativity that has
meaning outside of the elite classes you
know that actually is being applied in a
very ground up you know bottom-up way
that's being developed in a bottom-up
way with the very people who are most
impacted by our often bad decisions of
what what well first air about the about
the Scandinavian models at least the
part it has to do with design and
participation and um everything is
really important to not only to tell the
bright side of the story but but also
that there are all the time backlashes
in in this so one day and be and the
reason nothing is important to tell it's
not just to be naive about where what
you try to do but also one of the boys I
have for instance for schools and this
is that is the idea that there is a
simple method that can be taught and
this is inspector with you're saying
later it's also okay you organized like
this and this you set up
like this and list you have something
some design thinking to go with it and
there are three text books you can read
on it and but I think the point is it's
always extremely situated and it's it's
the competence of being able to read
what we talked about earlier today the
the glimmers of hope that people show in
the situation and act on that rather
than a prescribed procedure for how I
participation and then it got it it
should shoot you the ball that's one
thing and the other thing that worries
me a lot in Scandinavia is that people
are so tired of going to one
participatory meeting after another
leading to nothing so under the umbrella
of participation when things could have
been business basically it's as usual
and and and people who have really been
politically engaged in believing in the
vitalization of democracy yeah i just
wanna go and do my work instead of means
eating into these me so that's part of
it as well and and fine i think it's a
fascinating story you're telling about a
truly innovative and creative
environment and i think you're right
again there if we I think my should be
very again not writing recipes or how to
do it as anything I mean that was a
special coincidence that happened that
they had the the understanding of of the
indigenous community they had some
spectacular scientific skills that came
together
cetera and but and then I mean in in my
world when I came from from computer
science to begin with seraphs park what
was a similar anything in Palo Alto but
everyone has tried to copy Xerox PARC
it's not been this name it doesn't work
it doesn't work that way so it's so it's
more I think about about being attuned
to to to the specifics and I have a
colleague that some of you know him Lucy
suchman she was former with wizards and
Berkeley and a and and professor in
Lancaster and from for many years she
just has a very good point I think about
instead of focusing so much on those
places that name themself the innovative
hubs starting to look more for other
let's no less speculative is is pick a
spectacular places and see and much more
mundane maybe not rocket science and and
that there are many such a little places
that could be just as interesting maybe
not Nobel Prize winners but but how do
we instead of repeating Silicon Valley
Silicon Valley Silicon Valley how can we
start to name other a much more mundane
much in the many places so on the theme
participation let's open this up now to
discussion debate comments observations
you should we take a cluster of comm
site of observations comments and
uh I'm in going so it shouldn't just put
your hand up and yeah just a quick
question just building upon what you
just said something we were discussing
at lunch and you just mention again are
these ideas of backlashes and that
there's ideas seem to have this kind of
shelf life and then there's a thesis
antithesis synthesis there's this kind
of dialectic that happens and I'm
interested like maybe as it's just a
pose a potential way of thinking about
the question that Lily brings up about
kind of how these things are situated in
particular places because the question
is something like how do we read these
dialectics even in your presentation you
know you have these different phases
that you kind of went through in your
your own career and I guess I guess I'm
just trying to kind of understand better
kind of how we can create kind of a
maximum availability for possibilities
and these kind of discourses and
bringing more people into these
conversations and also empowering
everybody within that to give them the
tools to be able to actualize these
things which I think we talk we touch on
a little in the context of makerspaces
and so forth but yet there's still
something that is wanting from that
model and I i guess i guess i'm just
trying to try this trying to suggest
maybe it's not there's not that a
solution there's not that kind of model
for innovation which i think you guys
are your you're pointing out and it's
not a method there's not a Dogma but
there's conversation there's the
dialectic right that is that I believe
is progressive that is moving forward
that accumulates knowledge and allows us
to kind of build upon that I don't know
if there's only a question there I'm
just I'm just kind of responding i think
and you you use the term commons which I
which I really appreciated I was writing
notes madly that that the way these
makerspaces operate is that they really
are part of the public realm and and so
the idea of a redefined public realm as
one of productivity and creativity I
found really intriguing so so I
interested in that you want to talk any
more of them create before that could we
have something more in you wanted to
come as well see all right there was um
I was wondering because active
participation calls for some level of
literacy on context so as you mentioned
previously people voted for you because
they liked the way you left and it makes
me wonder is that the best solution and
how did you tackle that problem I was
struck it because like Lily having lived
through much of this development history
and I thought I wonder how much the
students realize how things used to be
produced in what we think of as a
creative realm of publishing or graphic
design or things like this how much
mundane work was involved in putting
together a publication and doing
physical paste-up or the first thing
that I worked on we had to submit that
even though we typed the whole the whole
document in a word processor we had to
give it to a publisher and it had to be
retyped because there were people whose
jobs depended on retyping the whole
thing and then we had to prove it and
send it back and do but you know back
and forth and so how much this has
changed as an industry and I'm struck in
your presentation of how much you're
sort of chasing the technology or trying
to invent it and then it gets invented
out from under you in a way and moved to
the next place so that's just one
comment but the other was that that we
keep trying to create a structure for
creativity and participation but maybe
much of what's most interesting is sort
of how do we identify the problem that
needs to be solved like the nurses did
in a particular context so we're not
going to run
out of opportunities in that regard even
though the technology is constantly
changing and but it's sort of how do we
beam power we as designers nimble about
entering into those conversations and
offering ideas and facilitating
engagement I thought there's going to be
responded sorry so I do as a student
who's been working away Oh trying to
outreach to the community or um do
projects that are more socially oriented
you know I've continuously seen that in
my work right the school or kids having
to do all these class projects that I
feel aren't necessarily like what I want
to be doing for the rest of my life you
know but how can students realize that
there are opportunities for community
engagement and how can you know there
needs to be this dialogue with
communities to solve problems there
needs to be a relationship but
continuing a understanding of how we can
as students help in a very small way in
a very engaging way the community at
large just here in Providence and how
can you know students who want to be
involved right get a greater opportunity
to do the work that is social engagement
with a Camille and Lily grants that's
well because you know you are grounded
in these communities
sure so starting with routing the
process in a problem the first question
that comes to mind is who defines the
problem and the process that you use to
actually root yourself in that problem
but I strongly agree that having an
abstract process that isn't based on
relations so looking around the terrain
of Rhode Island and Providence there are
community-based organizations that
already have a defined identity of
around a certain neighborhood or
identity and then there are obviously
issues where around development around
potential use of space for example and
how can you develop maybe a
participatory action research or
community-based approach to that and be
able to speak in different languages
right because what you need to do to
pass a class versus what you need to do
in a community to be respectful and
participatory might be two different
things and this goes back to your
question illiteracy right so literacy I
would say popular education like the
example you gave is about students and
academics learning social skills often
write that are based in the public based
in Poplar knowledge and so it's a
transformation both ways you should see
yourself as what is what is your
potential role and how do you not just
come in to transform and give knowledge
to other right you come in as a curious
person with some skills to offer but
also an openness that you are willing to
learn and and also willing to follow
which is is sometimes going to be
intentional it's going to be a intention
with what we're taught right because
you're you're going to go into a job
market where you can
eating and you need to be able to be
aggressive and you know prove your your
knowledge base so if there's a good
amount of juggling but I think students
here can make a tremendous impact on on
some community issues and I think that
the processes that have been outlined
our beautiful wonderful examples that we
can learn from and figuring out how to
apply them through conversation and you
have allies here in faculty what
department are you in okay so a number
of years ago a few faculty students and
alumni formed an applied research lab
here that was specifically for doing
what you're asking and and we have
worked we work locally that was what
Damien referred to in Central Falls and
now beginning in pawtucket and we work
internationally and it was set up to
address these issues and address them
outside of the classroom but also to
bring component parts of them into the
classroom because those fit with the the
academic objectives and and the
components that were more about research
about about you know learning from those
who actually were the primary
stakeholders those who were going to you
know who had the need and those who had
to live with whatever the outcomes were
and so so that has existed I also would
say that and it still exists it's no
longer part of RISD for various reasons
but but there also are many student
efforts that have come out of your
department and have
come out of architecture and a little
bit or maybe more than I know up from
graphic design but I would say those are
kind of the three primary departments or
the architectures maybe I should say
that have really driven more of the
social impact and engagement work yeah
okay okay but one other thing I just
want to mention is that in design lab
there it's made up of both Brown and
RISD people and the brown students at
the moment are between international
relations economics Urban Studies
environmental studies and engineering
and the engineering department is very
generously offered to pay for a website
that actually will become a navigational
tool for students like you who are
looking for who else's who else is out
there where existing partnerships exist
but it's basically how to navigate these
two schools how to find financial
support and then you know I see sitting
in front of you is Daniel Hewitt with
our research office which again is an
incredible resource for you know whether
it's about finding grant money or
whether it's just about linking people
together so so and they have started a
number of with faculty a number of
discussion groups that are pulling
together different faculty who have
shared interests and those are going up
as website so again there are a lot of
portals but nobody knows where they are
yet for this from the student body it's
very hard for you to navigate which is
why we're trying to now build these
these online networks and mapping
devices
could I just quickly just a student
questions I am I think work of a very
valid question and if i if i should add
something to what would you have been
saying I think that I mean it's natural
when you start as a design student you
want to become a big signature designer
that's most people start like that and
then find out that maybe there's some
other possibilities in life and then and
then becomes the question of what are
the opportunities for doing something
different than that and you're
describing a number of resources here
and if I look at at my own school what
we try to do a lot is so the problem
with doing a social design project as a
student is open that the time is too
short if you have to add you have to be
the things that you're engaging in takes
more than a semester or the house the
meditating takes a maybe a couple of
years or and so you have to go in into
something that is ongoing and one of the
things that we are offering our students
is that we try to engage them in the
research design projects that we do with
the community and the city over time and
that may may be quite similar so they
can go in and out there and they would
not be a summer frustrated because it's
not doesn't really give the possibility
to come up with this product that I have
designed with this service that I have
designed you you've been part of
something that is much more
collaborative and changed over time but
see when when school start to
acknowledge this and maybe lift up a
examples of how this was really
considered a good design even if it was
ongoing for many years and didn't have
very explicit outcomes either it it was
appreciated by the community or in
different ways appreciated f I think
things the things can change and
yeah and I mean someone like you that's
a that's that's that's a beginning of
assembly yeah we're often trying to do
is feel local capacity to be able to be
in control over their own lives and and
you know that's a creative act and the
designer is in many ways more a
facilitator than a designer with a big d
it doesn't mean that the people doing
this work don't do the other two but
it's but it's a it's a commitment to
move to applying your skills & expertise
because you believe that it has a role
to play in solving these bigger issues
and I would just add that in this spoon
partly relates back to what you said
that your generation is redefining the
disciplines you know that that you wear
academia's in a funny place right now
because we're still training people for
jobs that are the past and it's all
changing you know even in our lifetime
just thinking and you know we've been
and then and we've gone through we go
through a number of major recessions in
the design world that have totally
overthrown how designers practice how
offices are constructed the whole idea
of security and longevity and a job has
been also
a bunch of people here comes early and
and you know now it's changing because
you all believe that you have a far
bigger role to play in society than we
ever allowed ourselves at some level to
believe because we still were the
mindset that we had to fit into the
world as it was you guys don't believe
that and you should because you're out
to change the world and you have to
change the disciplines which need to be
overthrown and need to be rethought so
so okay so I have questions up up how
does the Euro of digital technology or
new technology take do you take into
account because in your presentation
you've mentioned about the emergence of
iphone i watch all those digital devices
that seemingly allows us to work beyond
our working hours and beyond our
traditional workplace but on the other
hand I think there are a lot of downside
of technology in terms of library for
explorer exploitation that are very
elusive is an camouflage if you look at
like the Amazon Mechanical Turk and it's
basically um it seems like it can allow
you to make some extra money but it's
actually a very low pay a time consuming
job that actually is taken by a lot of
Sir country workers because their normal
wage is very low so it becomes a
exploitation of the developed countries
taking the human resources um the
underdeveloped the communities and also
on the other hand not just the lower
income coming to but also the worker
community in general i think is somehow
chopper dies or kind of changed because
now there's so many jobs are replaced by
automation so for example the lady said
in the past or used to be job
specifically for transcribing text and
nowadays are a lot of traditional type
of jobs that are being replaced so i
think
there are a lot of problems that are
coming up so I was wondering how do you
think we can have learn to anticipate
problems instead of identifying problems
that are readily obvious did you tuck
these three just like for lunch thank
you so much for your talk um I just
wanted to ask you mentioned the the
women the coalition of women and they
were working towards us to like a social
innovation but it seemed that there was
a disconnect with technology is there is
there a problem I want I'm wondering in
this day and age where you have people
who are working towards social change
but there's just not enough of a link
between the digital and like the very
fat like there's so much work and
entrepreneurship and money going into
all these tech things but there seems to
be this disconnect between the social
and you know these refugee crisis like
how do you connect the two and why is it
being such a problem now why those who
like to talk about the relationship
between bottom-up and top-down so let's
say like a working co-op environment
where the workers are deciding what to
do by just collectively signing up for
something rather than the CEO hiring a
consultant to actually check all the
stakeholders do a research and figure
out what how to actually solve the
problem so finding that relationship
between the two is very very funny and
has always been very tricky for me as
they're like where to navigate because
as a designer I would have to navigate
through that process as well if I want
to create social change so I maybe you
can talk about that a bit
so um I would like to know how you as a
designer judge whose voice is important
in a participant project and I know that
the census is a very important in the
process but how much the census is
productive and how much becomes um too
much insurance and then I'm starting to
to your question they're very much and I
think it's a good question and I think
it's very difficult to come up with it
with a general good answer because it's
I will always have to say that it
depends but in my view the best the air
or the best or be the most interesting
way of collaboration that is an
agonistic a collaboration in the inverse
of shan't aloof in the sense that you
bring together actors with different
agendas and you acknowledge that they
have different agendas and you
acknowledge that there are big power
differences but still you some trying to
find a way to do something something
together but not not looking upon it as
if you have agreed and there is
consensus that that's the bet a drug
this is the best you can do given your
the different agendas and
competences and resources etc and the
problem with that model is that when you
go to the to the concrete for instance
we've been working with setting up a
social incubator the social intervention
incubator and we bring together people
from a lot of NGOs that have worked in
interesting ways in the suburbs with
lots of socially extremely interesting
project projects together with with with
venture capital with city officials with
a yeah and in this specific case is 50
60 people that do for workshops on this
and already on the second workshop at
the main capital owner industrialist in
mama he observed because this does not
fit with his interest anymore so he said
he sets up the incubator his own way and
he's got good connection with the
politicians that they do sense of the
how do you how do you and then this is
new to meet how do you hinder that those
empower opt out of this processes I mean
before we be very much occupied with how
can those in the margin have a say in
the process then that's still
fundamental but it's also if you want to
have these these agonistic processes how
do we make those in power stay and not
just go go away and do business as usual
yeah I don't have an answer to this an
animal think we're good enough at it but
it's kind of challenged to live with and
I think that links to to your question
of a participation I where mean
participation is not a panacea it's a
for instance we had during World War two
in Scandinavia we had a lot of
participation especially in Norway which
we call a collaborators I don't know if
you have collaborators as well those are
why the Quisling government who were
collaborating with with the gnosis so
collaboration is it's not not an easy
thing all this has to be situated again
and and try to air and and be aware that
this is this is in the power game and I
mentioned before the the murmuring of
the idiot in the meaning of how do we we
set up these a design encounters and
then there are those who just don't get
it we think because it doesn't really
matter to them or we are not posing and
is immune to them hey there's another
challenge and how do we how do we get
better to listen at them and maybe the
point is that they don't want to be
constructed they they are slowing the
process down but maybe that's exactly
what is needed let's it then go slower
that since is easy i think there's a
look the question is fair enough a
participation is not solving it but but
and this than here maybe an
old-fashioned old-fashioned modernist I
I still think that democratic
participation is fundamental to our way
of being social
and that also links to two to design and
as for the question of optic knowledge
of Technology I think that I mean you're
absolutely right and i hope i did not
argue for for that we're always just
running behind the latest technology in
the innovation i just wanted to point
out what happened as what we is often
considered major design technology
products and events and what are we
doing it at a similar time in a much
smaller scale and and a with their much
less impact and this is not without
technology i think it's very open to go
but with the important thing and that's
been the titles at my school is to say
that we don't have to start with the
technology we can start with meeting
like a with it with the nurses and find
out what what are they traveled with
there and and and and from that start to
do something that's rather than saying
well we have now this new Newton or
whatever the technology was then how can
how can we do something cool with that
in the context of the outcome of the
nurses it's a very different very
different approach okay so shall we wrap
up there and you can do your question
afterwards one on one yeah it's okay
just go
I think that listening to Zaza's and
Nikolai's comments and some of the
others that the tension you use sort of
outline moving from leaps forward in
concepts of participation and leaps
forward and design in these different
decades and I think that both of both
Zaza as a Nikolai's question are in a
sense about how things get turned into
businesses and how work this constant
struggle between a kind of democratic
vision and an ability to turn it into a
business proposition so that what zaza's
saying about its kind of attention
between producing products versus social
innovations and social structures and
the the energy the gravity is always
going to go to the product because you
can produce business and sell it and
things like that and to Nikolai's
comment you know kind of how do you how
do you push back against the the rise of
the consultancy to come in and we
figured out I mean process has now
become a business we can come in and
tell you how to do your processes so I
think that your point about maintaining
a kind of or your solution about being
local and sensitive to changing
circumstances is one response to that to
that pressure and maybe there are others
but I think just being alert to the the
forces of society at this point to try
to monetize to try to turn it into an
app to try to turn it into a business
that that we just have a culture that's
very oriented that way
and not very oriented towards
constructing real social enterprise okay
so I would summarize as participate
redesign it's hard yeah it's hard but be
nimble be thoughtful be smart be
strategic fight the battle the battle is
never ending is there to be four and
open it up but so can I a human bone
round of course over there and just so
you'll be continuing this discussion and
friday and test day so you would be more
than welcome thanks very much
