up this discussion of the day the format
for this is going to be that I Leonard
i'll tell you a tiny bit about all of
the panelists and then I am going to say
a few words and pose a question to them
they each have five or six slides that
they can refer to and i'll advance them
but basically we're going to try to have
this as a conversation the focus of this
discussion is about futuring but really
it's going to be I think about teaching
and about how we empower our students to
think about the future and to move
forward and into the world to practice
so very briefly I'm going to introduce
the panelists in the order in which they
show up on my screen rather than the
where they're sitting so you have to
sort this out but Kathleen grievers has
been teaching at RISD since has been
teaching since 2001 in the apparel
Department she has over 20 years of
experience as a technology-driven
creative apparel and fabric artist and
her expertise is in technology research
and implementation for the apparel
industry with a background in surface
design for home furnishings automotive
and apparel so we have very uh we have a
group of people here who all transgress
the boundaries of what you might think
of as their discipline in gonchar over
there with the beard you've met him
before here is an artist designer and
educator in Providence and he's on the
faculty of the school of engineering at
Brown of you as you have heard an
associate director of the brown creative
mind initiative which has got to be
wicked cool Beth Moser in her practice
based research blend scientific
processes and design methodologies to
probe the relationship between objects
and culture mining our cultural past and
present for insights into the
possibilities of our collective future
so we obviously had to have her because
that's perfect Erik Anderson is teaching
his teaching and research encompasses
the history of modern interiors
architecture furniture and product
design he's also teaching at RISD for
the last few years and Lily Herman is
serve landscape architecture and teaches
in urban design landscape urbanism
design architecture international
development Islamic architecture urban
history etc she's the founder of the
design lab at RISD which brings design
thinking practices and out comes
together with innovation and
entrepreneurship to address issues of
global poverty and social and
environmental injustice and I think
that's everybody right I man Tate I'm a
professor of architecture at risk here
at RISD and I am setting the stage for
this discussion I wanted there was a
comment I heard last night when I picked
up my daughter who is working on a
profile of a woman who's the seamstress
at our local dry cleaners and um
Michelle said to Katie she she was
talking about the fact that when people
come in with their garments and she
starts she says I try not to let them
see me cut their clothes when she's
doing alterations because they go and
she's her comment to this as she said
your dress was born was not born it was
made and this idea that the object once
finished it has this integrity that
you're not allowed to violate its calls
into question the whole process of
making it and remaking it that Yuriko
was was talking about about how we think
about changing things so I just thought
this was the idea that this object was
not born it was made and that raises all
the questions of who made it and how
they made it and where it was made and
what are the responsibilities of the
designer or the maker in that case we've
been talking today about thinking about
the future and I think also the other
word that's been really important in
this discussion is critical and I think
that as much as anything today has been
about recapturing the concept of
critical and thinking about critical
critical not as in snarky criticism and
you know I'm smarter than you are
because I can figure out how to be
negative about this thing that you're
doing but back to the concept of crucial
and and
that critical means let's focus on the
critical questions and the crucial
questions about how we make the future
so I think that we're getting to a point
of criticism without cynicism which
would be a very interesting place to
move academic discourse and I have so
we're going to talk today about how we
think about about teaching and about
students I think that the role of
Education in this process of design as
we've talked about today is incredibly
important and in their thinking about
the role and the education of designers
I've had the chance to talk to various
people around RISD and have recently
suggested that we stop talking about
being the best art school in the fill in
the blank you know country the world the
universe whatever it is and that we talk
instead that instead we ask ourselves
the question of what would it mean to be
the most important art school what does
it mean to use what we do to make a
difference and how do we help our
students see their way to doing that in
a culture which obfuscates not only not
only uses aesthetics to up the skates
but uses whole economic systems to
obfuscate the issue of where things come
from what they're for and what happens
to them and so today we're going to in
this piece of this we we had a
preliminary discussion some of us about
how you understand a moment for
transformation a moment an opportunity a
historical opportunity and it's a kind
of intersection understanding the
intersection of place and time where we
are in space or where we are in place
and where we are in time and I think all
of these teachers are working with their
students to understand either
particularly where the designer sits in
the web of global production and
consumption or where we are in history
as we move forward so that's the
question I want to put to the panel to
each answer for themselves how do they
add
press this question of where we are in
space in place or in time and in their
teaching so I'm going to start first
with in because his slide is up first
and i'll advance them for you thank you
so i thought i would just kind of start
with a very quick some quick things to
think about just the kind of friend that
caught the conversation in terms of
creative problem-solving create a
problem finding in education and design
practice now i want to start with the
question why don't they call horseless
carriages why don't they call cars
horseless carriages anymore they're just
this horseless now as they were a
century ago maybe more so horseless
nas's standard equipment on most models
these days right the automobile
developed out of in an opposition to
familiar concepts concepts associated
with the horse and carriage this was the
familiar paradigm when the automail
automobile first emerged one day you had
a mode of transportation to had this
thing called the horse and this thing
called a carriage and then the next she
didn't need the horse anymore but the
idea remain sub lated in the subsequent
concepts that emerged is there someone
changing slides ok so long after the
automobile had made the horse and
carriage obsolete in the association it
faded the concepts of each still define
one another this synthesis is still
present today traces of the horse and
carriage can be found in terms like
horsepower and in the names of classic
cars like Mustang Colton Bronco consider
the form of a car's design you can see
how forelegs evolved into four wheels
and headlights in the eyes of metal
beasts of burden rolling down the
highway the vestiges of these formative
features still affect how we make sense
of the built environment in our material
culture even if the original antecedents
are long have been long forgotten and it
is in this understanding that these
concepts emerge from the past so we
might be able to extrapolate into make
predictions about the future next next
slide you can think of this process is a
creative dialectic in which familiar
ideas are negated in a new synthesis
emerges we compare this to that in order
to give meaning to either eat to each
and to orient our concepts to the things
around us these constraints make the
things around us meaningful but they
also limit that meaning as well however
we also have the option movie beyond
these constraints opening up new
territories of possibility we can design
between or within these
constraints and affordances between this
and that and we can design beyond them
as well by expanding the territory of
possibilities in seeing solutions beyond
the given constraints we provide
opportunities to play and win positive
some games next slide as educators and
design practitioners we can we are
creative problem solvers it is important
to be able to think creatively within
constraints but also important to think
beyond them to to approach design
problems both divergently and convergent
convergently divergent thinking is open
towards many possibilities or solutions
convergent thinking is closed towards a
single or correct solution the virgin
thinking's open orientation saying yes
deferring judgment framing the
possibilities of both an terms designers
might call this ideation convergent
thinking and saying no by making
critical judgments selecting this at the
expense of that framing the
possibilities in either or terms
conversion thinking closes off
possibilities in order to develop and
refine an idea and move the process
forward but both are necessary critical
orientations for translating fork for
concrete izing the abstract in /
translating the abstract into the
concrete the last slide I've got that
computer vote so for example considering
considering a seemingly insoluble
problem consider how you might find a
needle in a haystack if we think
divergently and we open ourselves up to
imagine if possibilities no matter how
ridiculous we begin to discover that
there are many strategies to refrain
problems many solutions in many ways to
move beyond the apparent constraints you
might burn the hay where you can in
Mewes them use a magnet to find the
needle in the haystack in the ashes or
you might consider putting the water and
the hay and water and allowing the haida
float in the needle not easily
separating a needle from the hay
creative problem-solving allows us to
see beyond apparent constraints seeing
abundance we might have originally only
seen scarcity expanding the territory of
possibility and creating new
opportunities to allow us to move beyond
a priori assumptions in zero-sum games
as our default strategies for engaging
in social critique creative practice and
design cherries can give us the
necessary frameworks to move beyond to
move towards positive some outcomes
where designers work with all
stakeholders to create when winds that
expand the territory of possibility
improve everyone's experience thank you
so I'm definitely not as eloquently
stated as Ewing that there's a couple
different processes that I found in in
my in the apparel departments pedagogy
of teaching as well as the open doors
that have happened at RISD for allowing
faculty to explore nuances in different
ways and dynamics of teaching so one of
the things that we do is we do an
industry project and this industry
project was spoke so clearly to me
because it was all the aesthetics of
being sustainable levi's has a huge
amount of sustainable efforts they've
just launched a new product and dockers
caldwell thread which is every stitch
every thread every piece of it is
transparent you know where it's come
from it's almost like going to whole
foods and seeing where the meat comes
from it's the same type of aesthetic and
and research and what this project did
with our students is that they were
allowed to then create some sort of
surface design some sort of innovative
way to produce the gene the gene that's
reproduced over and over again again
speaking to the marketability of it but
also Steve speaking to the
sustainability of it by using the Eureka
labs in San Francisco and being able to
explore this type of product so this
materiality led to also a symposium that
we did in October which had a red thread
of material the exploration of leather
exploration of how to craft with leather
is leather a sustainable product next
slide and then there was also an
industry project in which we work with
Burton Snowboards totally off the beaten
path of what Levi's offered to RISD but
a different way of looking at
manufacturing a different way of looking
at local product a different way of
looking at design the the peril seniors
all took a bus up to Burlington Vermont
walked through their archives understood
the heritage understood every aspect of
designing for this company and then
created
and their own version of the product
again the transparency of understanding
what the educational history is behind
the company and lastly our second to
last Lee this was a collaborative
project that apparel and ID did this is
a winter session class for shoe design
in Italy keeper Nichols and I have had
the honor to do this class for the last
three years the one thing that comes out
of it again is is material the
beautification of how Italian workers
take pride in their product it's not
just a product that's that's
commercialized we go into I guess what
we would say the homegrown local
businesses and really understand their
design aesthetic and how they produce
their materials this year was the first
year that we also went into glass design
we went into lighting design we saw all
these locally homegrown for lack of
better term products and designers and
we spoke to them and the students were
engaged with them and understood their
theory so it wasn't just googling a
product and understanding the internet
aspect of a product but really smelling
it under at the design quality is
looking at how they produce it looking
at how the workers worked with each
other deeper than what the Internet has
for us and then lastly and in the
material aspect I started to learn more
about fur and I'm a vegetarian I rescue
dogs I you know I have two rabbits
guinea pigs birds in my house three kids
of course not taking care of him it's me
and so this aspect of understanding how
to design with fur I teetered with but I
went and I did it and it was very
interesting on how the relationship and
sustainable aspects of really workin fer
in a way that you haven't
waste and and you can't afford to have
anyways so the dynamic of designing with
this material was enlightening to say
the least thank you okay so and question
how we are using the term critical and I
would question whether we're all using
design with the same meaning so I as an
said I a run design lab which stands for
design social innovation and
entrepreneurship and some of our members
are here but this has really grown out
there three of us who run this lab there
are two architects and I and both of the
other two architects are one is a
cuban-american on the faculty here and
the other is from Bogota Colombia and it
really represents kind of our worldview
that we don't see a here and there and
we we operate everywhere but as somebody
who has a background in science and
history and design IC design very
broadly and probably the person here who
teaches whose whose approach to design
is probably closest to my way of seeing
it is Charlie cannon with his emphasis
on systems design and I do see it as
systems and IC design as actually
working within systems and designing
systems and designing strategies which
is what design lab does so so the design
of a product or architecture which is
the the field that the fields that we're
all from is is often a tool in a means
toward an end but it is not the end
itself so we work on social and economic
empowerment and we work in many parts of
the world we work in South Asia where
I've been personally working for about
close to 20 years we work in
post-conflict post disaster or just
economically very stressed communities
we work in Colombia and other parts of
Latin America we work now in Africa with
Mass General Hospital and stay on this
one for a second
and because I I want to mention this
project this is actually a new effort
that we have started that has grown out
of work done in the lab and work done in
my courses but it's about the Bay of
Bengal and it started with you and this
is I'm using this as an example of how
we think and how we operate and so n
asked us to talk about time and place
and for me the Bay of Bengal is again
it's a good example of how we think
about this because we started with two
books one is called Sunil is by Sunil
Amrith it's called crossing the bay of
bengal which is a very interesting book
but i had a problem with the title
because it already marginalizes the bay
itself it's something to cross and the
other book is by robert kaplan called
monsoon and Kaplan's book is about how
the Bay of Bengal which has a quarter of
the world's population living in the
countries bordering it it is the body of
water that is most susceptible to sea
level rise it has the largest numbers of
human of trafficked humans crossing it
it you know on and on and on and on this
is one of the most important bodies of
water in the world and it's the one
that's had some of the greatest amount
of world trade since ancient times and
what Kaplan says is that with the rise
of India and China it's becoming the
most important body of water yet again
all of China's well all of their food
that has grown outside of China all of
their oil and gas all moves through the
Bay of Bengal all of the are most of the
world's piracy has moved from the coast
of Somalia now to the Strait of Malacca
right off the Bay of Bengal so we
started this mapping project at MIT and
at Harvard and it's now come to brown
and RISD which is about putting all of
this information that we can find about
the flows the Damien was talking about
in his introductory talk we're putting
all of this into visual content and we
have planners engineers architects
Landscape Architects
and soon we'll have historians
economists and everybody else as part of
this project so this is really how we
think and this is how we're trying to
position our students that there is no
here and there we are all interconnected
we actually always have been and that we
need to have this mindset and in terms
of how we can act responsibly going
forward so these are some of the issues
that we've been working on we're now
building this new center for integrated
design and development for post post
Civil War post-tsunami sri lanka where
we're actually trying to cross pollinate
between disciplines design lab is an
interdisciplinary initiative and we're
trying to position we're trying to build
local capacity so that they actually
have the tools they need to to determine
their own future thanks oh and we work
locally this is um in Central Falls but
I won't go into that if anybody's
interested talk about it and you could
just run through all of my images these
are all images that might show up in
design history classes that I teach and
they're all images of features of one
sort or another themselves may be
critical in some ways maybe not critical
in some ways I I don't in my design
history classes there is yet I don't
necessarily teach the future per se or
critical futures per se but I am very
interested in what art history can offer
as a set of tools maybe a set of
disciplinary tools for interrogating
images images or what we work with as
our historians in it I think one thing
that's really interesting today as we've
seen a lot of images of the future of
different sorts and different media and
some extent we've been thinking about
how to get beyond maybe the seductive
surfaces of certain kinds of images of
the future and we've also been like
thinking today about what different
disciplines can contribute
cute whether there are design
disciplines or anthropology and
sociology and aesthetics and and art
history so when when I asked students to
look at these images of the future in
the context of an art history course and
what I'm most interested in is finding
tools for seeing each image as a way of
making meaning of an object or or a
space and finding ways of sort of
getting beyond the seductive surface of
these images and I think all these
images that I pulled together here
somewhat at random from courses i'm
teaching this semester are and one way
or another related to the aesthetics of
modernism maybe the exception of that
William Morris cabinet at the beginning
and they all or at least a lot of them
rely on certain aesthetic
characteristics of modernism of
geometric abstraction and
dematerialization and lightness and
subtrans setting the limits of materials
and structure but they all come from
very particular ideas about the future
and very particular considerations of
their moment or of their place and
getting getting beyond the seductive
surface of modernist aesthetics or these
images to me would mean kind of
understanding that the particular
conditions of a place or a moment that
we're being responded to when these
different visions of the future are
being constructed that's that's sort of
the set of critical tools that I want my
students to to gain thank you here I
need to go the one that's sorry I have
to stand up because I made a mistake of
having a cup of coffee uh how did just
that one I just want that hair which one
it this is the order they're in okay but
you have to get it on here
convince their yeah whatever you want no
all right so sorry I now we're all awake
um so I'm Beth motor and I teach in the
ID industrial design department and I
teach an advanced studio so that's an
undergrad class um that's called
strategic futures and the goal at least
my goal is to take your famous my a
student who did this is here the goal is
to get students to think strategically
about the future and then also to kind
of bring it back and think strategically
about the present so that there are many
challenges to this goal the first is
that in order to think strategically
about the future you have to know a lot
about what's happened in the past and
currently and with students who are in
college you know they haven't been live
that long so they don't know that much
about how everything is connected so the
first assignment I give them as they
pick a basic object a clothes pin in
this case paper and they have to make an
object what I call an object web which
is all of the systems that allow that
object to exist so it could be systems
of manufacturing environmental systems
it could be systems of belief however
people expect to use it and then once
they had this mapped out for their
object then I asked them to break the
web to pull out one or two different key
factors so that the object becomes
extinct right so that's the first thing
we start with a present and then the
next thing we do is we go back in time
and I have students look at historical
in this case art history the painting
has historical objects in it along with
use and I want students to look at
systems and objects that often some
evolved forward and some of them didn't
and think about how those old systems
and objects can be mined to produce
things for the near future right so like
I don't know if you can see in here but
a lot of people have this this young man
here has is carrying his spoon in his
hat right so there are all these
different ways if you think about you
know disposable cutlery or
are you making it out of metal and how
many does every family need if everyone
has their own spoon that's all you need
and you just carry it with you forever
right so having students look back first
before we start looking forward so
looking for insights and inspiration
throughout the semester as well we're
constantly we're reading articles
students are reporting back or
discussing current events again trying
to get everyone aware of the existing
issues and sort of where they came from
so in the hopes that then we can look at
those trends they might be trends that
died out or they might be trends that
move forward and increase in importance
so whether it's ignore obesity or
internet use or children's lack of
exercise we discuss all the different
aspects whether its economic social
health all sorts of things now how do I
get out of the do you want to do is I
just wanted it's not down on its back
its back with sorry these are how to
order okay so then our first big main
future project because that's what the
class is about is strategic futures is
we do um we do a strategic game and the
students are all sent out our test cases
RISD and they're assigned a key
stakeholder in the RISD community and so
they go out in the interview the person
that they're then going to roleplay so
it's you know someone from the Board of
Trustees someone from academic affairs
the person who's in charge of risk
assessment parents as well so they
basically they come together it's a
day-long session and all the students
play the role that they have and they're
given a scenario which is a scenario in
the future where there's some stresses
put on the organization so the students
have to decide in I can't remember this
one they were talking about so with
global warming of course frisbees right
along the canal right so what happens
when the level that canal rises a lot of
these buildings like we would kind of be
underwater right now so they have to the
strategic game makes the students think
about first of all they have to put
themselves in someone else
news and think about what is it that
motivates that person and then as a
group they have to come up with
solutions to sort of sudden imperatives
that they're given in these in these
scripts no sorry um that's fun okay so
this is one of the things that students
then went on and did from that and what
students do with all of our discussions
of of different different trends they
set up a matrix with two key
uncertainties because that's the thing I
think Cameron was talking about it
earlier though I don't know if you agree
with this approach or not but um
basically you can't can you predict the
future and the answer is I think no then
what do you do with that and in this
case what I have the students do for
this particular sign is they made up
make a matrix they choose to key
uncertainties this one is let's say in
the next 50 years is the US economy
going to be bad or is it going to be
strong right and then are we will we
have addressed or start addressing
issues with with global climate change
or we not have and then the students
pick a quadrant and i have to tell you
with this technique it's really boring
if you pick the one where we all do
everything right and we hold hands and
sing songs that's really boring so
students I usually encourage them to
pick something that's more challenging
and this is an example of so they build
then a scenario so what does that mean
what could that possibly mean if the
economy is doing well but we're not
addressing issues from global climate
change so it means that basically
there's more conflict right people are
fighting over scarce resources there's
there's less to go around things are
unpredictable food their food shortages
so how could the economy be doing well
and that scenario that they built in
this case was that basically become sort
of like a bunker military mentality
right this sort of we wall ourselves off
from the rest of the world and we're
doing just fine thank you right even
though the world is going to hell in a
handbasket um and then where it is
raised even and this this was all about
RISD how does RISD remain viable in this
actually rather sinister scenario so
they have to think about what does that
mean and in this case it means that
Ray's d this hotbed of creativity we're
making drones we're working for the
military we're doing all these things
which in actual fact we could do right
now in fact sometimes maybe we do I
don't know I don't know everything that
happens here um but but the whole point
of this and then I oh I should i should
add on so this is the type of you know
projects we do but then the last project
which I don't have enough slide space to
do but it's as students and have to pick
a brand that they're interested in and
do the same thing for a brand to figure
out where their vulnerabilities pick key
uncertainties think about how that brand
can can survive in the existing you know
in the context that they're creating the
future context and the reason that we do
that of course is because our students
need to have jobs when they graduate and
the the whole from to my mind the reason
cuz i am saying well why should we
bother to teach students this kind of
stuff for me it's good i think for
students to know first of all to
understand current context for their own
work and also to think strategically
about how design can impact things
either for good or for ill and hopefully
as they look forward into that future
they can start to have an impact the way
they behave now and then all of those
students graduate of course and they all
go off with all these thoughts and
hopefully start impacting something you
never know it could be where you're 14
years later right that someone remembers
something that they learned so all right
thank you I'll take that I was just
going to show a couple of slides from
the course that Damien and I do on green
rethinking green urbanism which is like
this is a kind of imaginative projection
that we ask students to make about how
they could think about the future these
slides were just images of how using a
very local and familiar context how how
you could rethink Providence in this way
that Lily's talking about into some
extent best talking about of
understanding systems and intervening in
those systems
and but we this group was resolutely
optimistic about the opportunity to make
change another group said we should go
to Mars that was their answer but I
didn't have as many good slides of there
so these are just different ways to
rethink resource management water
adaptive reuse and the rest so I stole
these questions from the first session
because I knew we weren't going to
answer them in the beginning so I
brought them back to this session so I'd
like to give the panelists a chance to
if they have any questions for each
other in how we approach this I have a
very RISD overbalanced panel so maybe
I'll let Ian ask a question of the panel
to start us off and well maybe we'll
start with the last one does it does it
imply new modes of design pedagogy one
of the things I was thinking about
trying to kind of see if there were some
threads that we could tie all these
things together was I'm interesting this
idea of prototyping in real-world
context iterative prototyping the real
world context when you're in a studio
you're making little models you're not
hurting anybody you know it's just kind
of it's there you learn something from
it you make another one when you're
trying to design for social impact you
have to figure out a way of engaging
your user in some way and I would just
be interested in kind of hearing maybe
from a historical perspective maybe from
some of the work you're doing in the
field other contexts how should we be
thinking about iterative prototyping
when we're designing for a particular
context it's an interesting question so
we run a summer design-build program and
Central Falls we also are doing
design-build work in Africa and in Sri
Lanka and this idea of iterative I mean
first of all we're working with the
communities and part of our goal is to
make everything we do a learning
experience for everybody involved so
we're trying to build capacity build
build skills on on all those levels and
and in terms of both the first and the
last question and also the idea of
iterative
of we don't first of all we always
engage for a very long time we don't do
projects we go in and we have a long
term relationship out of which projects
grow and so the idea that we have a
sustained involvement with a community
means that does anything that is
physical design is evolving over time
that it's being used it's being
rethought it's being changed you know
that we're learning through watching it
it go through the role of doing what it
was supposed to do within that society
and it was to what it does and what it
is was decided in partnership with the
community it was designed for but i do
think and i'm going to let somebody else
talk but i do think this this you know
it we are talking about more I think
field based learning now you know again
to go back to Anne's question about time
in place I feel to be personal for a
moment that this is my time in place
I've been waiting for the whole time
I've been at RISD for the students we
have today the students today are what
I've always wanted they're incredible
there they are global in their mindset
they want to be engaged they want to be
in the world and they have that
opportunity I really find I don't know
they're there is something again to say
there's no here and there that those
that's how our students think and so I
think we are at a critical point in
terms of opportunity and in terms of how
we can impact the world but I also do
think it's demanding new pedagogical
models I think Lily that the your point
about iterative taking IANS question
about iterative design and then putting
it in place and in community goes to the
questions that were raised that Israel
raised about projects that are done and
then not reconsidered and redone and
that that idea that we bring into it the
sort of studio discipline of making
mistakes and learning how to correct
them world development doesn't use
give you that opportunity we make
mistakes and then we move on but if you
can get out of the kind of single stream
solution so you know seeking and into
understanding things with these more
complex webs it's inevitable that the
web will lean into the solution in
unexpected ways and create new
opportunities and new things that have
to happen and that gives us this
question of you know cultivating agility
among designers not being you know that
that's a positive but with a value
system for corrects for self correcting
and understanding when something is good
or when you want to say no as Cameron
was saying earlier and just to kind of
very quickly follow up on that this idea
of quickly prototyping in how we
celebrate failure now and and being able
to kind of look at that maybe with a
different kind of critical orientation
because I think a lot of what we've
heard today is let you know when things
fail we need to learn something from it
but oftentimes it shuts down a kind of a
path that may otherwise be be fruitful
if we kind of keep going in that
direction so it's it's that question of
failure and quick prototyping and I
agree with everything you said about
kind of getting to know the space and
doing the research and getting to the
people but it's also I mean it seems
like there's we're design wheat when
we're a teaching product design for
example we teach in a very different way
quick iterative fail often you know kind
of just work through the process very
quickly little resolution prototyping
and I'm just curious a kind of how you
know how we can flush that out a little
bit more you know I come from a whole
different standpoint and you say you
know talking from the apparel world
fashion and sustainability it doesn't it
doesn't connect it does there's there's
not a bridge between the two so how do
you teach a way for upcoming apparel
designers to think about the broadness
of what they're producing how do you
make them understand the transparencies
to understand every nuance of what
they're creating of where the materials
come from of who's making the materials
you know going back to history
understanding all the nuances of history
and and and how we're going forward and
how they can change things with the
approaches of Technology you know I'm
not a hundred percent on the boat of 3d
printing I can't see the sustainable
efforts of it yet I'm completely
exploring it more but to teach that
apparel student all those developments
and how to make sure that they produce
something and prototype something as
transparent as possible it's it's it's
hard it's definitely a challenge but I
think in doing so you're you're really
making if there's a thread between
fashion and sustainability it's the
transparency of education and historical
value of what they're producing I think
you you also go to the question that was
has come up about workers systems and
the whole culture of make it and break
it entrepreneurial you know and and this
and there's an unfortunate relationship
between that and the art school is
caroline has been saying that we're
teaching everybody go out there and make
your own way and do your own thing and
good luck getting a pension you know are
being able to retire or get old or have
cracks in your face like Yuriko pottery
the of not Yuriko but the pottery but
the idea that that this kind of agility
you know glorifying agility and
flexibility and ability to get up after
failure is all well and good but in a
system like Lily's talking about where
you have to stay in place and fix your
mistakes and learn from them and make a
new thing or if you you know in a
company there used to be you know
experimentation and failure and things
within a system but you were still
secured within a job and we've taken all
that has come out of the system and so
you know how we're preparing people in
the celebrity culture yeah you could be
a great success and go on and you know
be
rich but if not how do you operate in
these more complex webs or how do we
help people understand what they're
going into and how to be successful in
it that's a big question if any of you
want to answer it I'm not going to
answer that but it does bring to mind I
so I think designs great i love doing
design um but i think it's a little bit
like you know if you're a podiatrist and
you're trying to solve the world's
problems you make a shoe insert um and I
sometimes feel like there are we have to
be honest there are a few now maybe not
many but there are some problems that
design just isn't the right thing to fix
um so you could design a wonderful thing
to help someone be more independent at
home as they age that's great but if all
the people who were interested in that
went and you know marched on Capitol
Hill and got better funding to support
people as they age that would be better
do you know so I think um I just I just
want to mention that because I think we
need to make sure that we're not
designing inserts sometimes shoe inserts
when we really need to be you know
changing the system why isn't it either
or why is it either or not at both fan
because you could make the argument that
designing a better system technology
lets say to help people be more
independent in their old age would help
create more awareness would help create
more interest and would help the
political side of it I mean it goes to
this question of an exploring all day of
the the critique the critical aspect of
it and that oftentimes critique is a
kind of negation it's a kind of do this
because it's at the expense of that and
I'm just wondering if that's the way we
should be thinking about this maybe we
should be thinking about it more is the
kind of both and kind of thing that they
complement each other perhaps yeah I
mean I would agree with that I still
think that there's sometimes but yeah
obviously yeah um I just I think
sometimes we just need to be honest that
there there are other ways that we as
individuals can operate in the world
aside from designing an object a system
or
to solve the problem sometimes the
problem is a political problem and it
could be that there's you know or a
funding problem but it's a system and
it's a system that needs the
transparency and the visualization
skills and the ability to rican sep chua
lies alternatives that designers might
bring to that and you know i think if
you think about politicians and
engineers and lawyers in certain
categories of being you know trained to
think in certain columns and designers
are inherently trained and artists you
know to think across that and to
challenge those categories and i think
that you know listening to carolines
presentation and some of what cameron
was saying really struck by this issue
of kind of atomizing the community into
into individual artists versus and even
individual efforts like the you know the
plants in argentina you know we're there
or the evergreen cooperatives there are
all these pieces but we're still not
using the pieces to challenge the bigger
structures and question is there an art
project there it's a question of the
generalist and specialist right and i
think that this is one of the reasons
why design is so important because we
are trained to be generalists in some
respects we're trained all those
categories of people that you describe
the politicians designers whatever
they're all problem solvers potentially
creative problem solvers and you in
order to solve problems in those ways in
the kind of think beyond your own kind
of way your own specialization you have
to reach across different disciplines
and I think it's it's hard enough I
think teachers have a difficult time
doing that what I see in students often
time oftentimes is that they don't they
that these kinds of our specialties our
disciplines are things that we've kind
of grown into and we sometimes forget
that problem-solving moves across
boundaries in very fluid ways and I
think this goes to that yes questions
from the audience
yeah we got six of them up here we don't
need anybody that's talking to him Mike
so we can get it on throw them into the
audience go ahead I'm a student in
industrial design here at RISD and just
a comment on what both Ian and bed said
I've worked with in the past and I know
Beth just for being around the ID
building and I think that what's what's
becoming complicated is that once I
graduate from RISD I don't feel
comfortable calling myself a designer
even though that's what I'm being
trained in technically because I think
that that what the way that we're
thinking is just so much broader than
what it used to mean and I think that
we're being we're being taught to think
strategically and so putting yourself in
the box of what a designer is is is kind
of limiting and so I think that a lot of
us who are graduating are struggling
with the idea of like what are we going
to be what are we doing next because we
don't fit into the box of what what used
to be called the designer and so I think
a lot of the conversations today are
kind of about what's the future and
whether the profession the title
designer is even going to exist in the
future because the people who are being
educated right now such as lots of
people in this room are just being
taught to think strategically but there
isn't a name for that yet and maybe the
name for that is designer maybe can you
just have to you know you have to take
it back from the people who make it you
know putting putting pretty image or
something so i think it's just it's it's
under transformation this whole thing
and i think that we're trying to define
something that is still undergoing so
much change every day so i think that's
where there's there are things that both
of you said different things in the same
way in the same way the same thing in
different ways and so it's it's hard to
define yeah next to you hi so I my
question is kind of similar to pacis but
um there's a lot of talking about
designers and who's designing and I
think Lily you talk a lot about wanting
to be part of that community and be
local there even though you're not
necessarily local so you make yourself
local and you find these ways to be part
of that community but you're never
unless it's where you grew up when
grew up there and you're part of that
you're never fully going to be there and
I think something that just keeps
running through my head and all of this
is that like everyone who's sitting up
here being the designers talking about
being the designers and what Beth is
saying about there are things that
designers aren't supposed to fix there
are problems that need to be fixed
though so maybe the question is about
who's learning design and who is who is
who are we teaching designed to and I
mean I think a lot of i'm also a brown
student and there's a lot of
conversation of brown right now about
sure of elitism and academia and and the
way that it is incredibly hard for
people who come from lower socioeconomic
standing to get to a university like
brown and learn these things that are
supposed to change the world and so you
miss all of these perspectives from
these people who probably have the most
interesting things to say about the
socio economics of american policy right
now or what lots of things that brown
studies all the time so I mean I think
we've been talking about these missed
perspectives and how does how does a new
design pedagogy center on making those
people that designers instead of just
accepting your limitation saying we'll
have someone else's thing to fix and I
think there's a lot of I have a lot of
respect for designer just step back and
say no I can't make a thing I can't make
a foot insert to fix this problem but
then how do they still encourage a
solution but and I think that that
what's been said about strategic
thinking and you know it so that you
have the great privilege luxury of
taking time to develop skills to think
about these webs and and and and
interconnections and that when you go to
a new place no understanding how to
bring that as a skill with attention and
humility is part of what hopefully you
might be learning at 1525 years ago you
might not have been learning that but I
think that's you shouldn't there's a
difference between bringing a skill like
that and having the local having the
innate knowledge and understanding which
is going to do what in a given
circumstance because having worked in a
lot of different contexts and
disciplines there a lot of people who
don't have the ability to float over the
circumstances and look further afield
and see what some of the bigger
solutions might be and that's a real
to bring in to a community that might
have trouble you know they might know a
lot like how to remake all the machinery
and retake the factory but they might
not be able to see some of the
opportunities and knowing which is what
and having that right thing I think it's
part of that it's hard to know if they
do or don't know those things exactly
that's what I mean about humility and
attention and being able to understand
when people do have that yeah and then
will depend on so hey there i have no
question sort of about the language that
surrounds design culture and sort of how
how rarefied it is and how obtuse it can
be and how completely uninviting it is
to somebody who doesn't necessarily
think about design on a daily basis so I
I feel like they're there isn't really a
good entry point in in mass culture
where there is with like a dystopian
sci-fi film sort of shows you a future
that you might not want and you don't
look at you look at that you say I don't
want it but you don't necessarily think
about the role of the designer and
avoiding that so do you see a way that
we can have a gateway in mass media and
sort of start start that conversation on
a much larger scale than the rarified
done in ray be kind of speculative air I
want to give that to the panel but also
I would like to invite anyone else who's
been on the panels today to start to
offer answers to some of that
so I'm thinking about what you were
asking and and I guess the thing that I
hope that this critical turn invites is
that designers don't need to only think
in design early ways and we are not
boxed into our occupational and
professional training right that the
that what what coherent featuring needs
and what moving into a future requires
is engaged citizens people who are
applying creative problem solving in
their home lives in their domestic lives
in their political lives in their
neighborhoods and these things are not
we know that each scale that we might
live at and work at has different
leverage points but it requires mean a
political action it requires thinking
about the kinds of things that we're
engaging in and it requires resistance
and those are human characteristics and
human behaviors or you know first and
there are design early approaches to
those things certainly but you know I
want to be a dad I want to be a citizen
I want to want to be in the streets and
sometimes I have to wear different
clothes and different roles to do that
but that's what I think it's required of
us can I answer the media question how
do you reach a method mean that's why
I'm working on a book on fiction and
design because I think that sometimes
it's easier to read a story or to listen
to other people's stories to understand
sort of help interpret I have no
delusions that this will be Stephen King
kind of reading that will reach that
kind of mass audience but I look for
design criticism in places like the New
York or the new york review of books I
also read flop des philosophy khamenei
usual suspects but I'm interested in how
people think through and with design
situations as well as things and I was
thinking about the political question
before you know Ralph Kaplan who's
practically he must be 99 now he was you
know he's been
a lot of people have issues with them
and I think it can be very facile and
he's so tied into designing commerce and
Herman Miller but in his book then what
about this you know Hawaii can unlock
the door and believe the 14th hotel or
whatever it is he is a chapter on the
sit in a situation design it's
absolutely something that's worth
reading again because now it operates
under co-design participatory design but
this was a way of viewing political
action as changing as the sensibility in
the perception of the situation I'm no
runs the air scholar but I do think
that's another place you can go to to
think about the politics of the
perception and the politics of
aesthetics and designers I would argue
yes we are mothers fathers and we want
to put on different hats when I get on
the train I'm going to read a crappy
mystery to relax but I don't think you
ever leave a mode of thinking I mean I
just don't think you can if you have if
it's a vocation I'm not a designer but
I've been involved in a lot of politics
electoral politics Street politics and
one of the things I've learned being
married to an who is a designer is that
there's a quality in design that is
incredibly valuable in politics people
have a tremendous difficulty
articulating what they really want and
they're much better at articulating what
they don't want and so what that means
is left to themselves a lot of
conversations become I don't want this
well I don't want that and what design
can do in the right circumstances is
help people as has been said several
times on the panel visualize the future
and identify a future that is not about
not wanting things but about wanting
things and I just want to say for those
of you who may not know Ann had a
tremendous impact in somerville
massachusetts in 1998 she gave a lecture
talking about the assembly Square area
is a large area in somerville that was a
dying big box zone and she had offered a
vision of what it could be if it were if
the new t stop were put in and if
residents were put in and businesses
were put in and so forth and this vision
was so startling and desirable that a
citizen group was formed called mystic
he's getting this slightly mixed up well
thank you I guess the point is it is now
a huge beautiful mixed use t stop place
now as Ana's doing this again with an
area called union square but as somebody
in politics I can say that the ability
to take all these confusing negative
feelings which actually conceal positive
desires and then turn that into
something that people can then discuss
and negotiate is an incredibly valuable
tool in all those roles parenting but
the truth is that this was was a
community effort with the input and what
I brought to it with a number of other
people was strictly the visualization of
it which did then enable the
conversation to go into a different
place because people well I'd say the
way I say this to the students is it's
amazing but most people can't see what
isn't there and that's the skill you
bring is the ability to see something
that isn't there and then people can get
around that as a concept so thank you
building on the earlier I just have a
quick question or a question good which
is the which is the reference was made
to that our standard cultural model of
thinking about the future is dystopian
I'm wondering how you in your work that
can alter that
um do you guys or to the panel for that
or just someone else in the audience
won't answer that I think it's an
excellent question yeah sorry um mine
kind of relates that but um so I might
be a little bit cynical but you'd be the
only person in the room I mean the idea
of designers is being kind of this great
force it's not a little bit arrogant to
say especially like because we haven't
seen any of the ramifications because I
mean if you look at how a design like
the history of design was come become we
always think that we're doing the best
thing possible and we can always be as
critical as we want but we can never
kind of see what the problems are until
we get to that point aren't we like
aren't we being a little bit arrogant
saying that we can solve all these
problems one of the first public
meetings I did somebody said why should
we trust you aren't you the ones who
screwed this up in the first place site
was that iterative question failure also
goes to learning and bringing him
brought me into it but I think I just
want to say something to this because I
think we're in a period where we've gone
through at least in the architecture
world a period of extended
self-flagellation after the failures of
what are described as the failures of
modernism and the result was an
excessive timidity and an unwillingness
to take on any large-scale
transformative projects and so I would
rather at this point urge people to be
bold and smart and have humility and all
that stuff but to not neither climb up
into a tower or hide under a rock at
this point when there's so much to be
done whose bet is there one back there
um so I was just like to bring attention
back to say just question earlier um and
just think about how if we're going to
take design seriously and to seriously
think about it critically how are we
going to think about who's designing and
who's empowered to think creatively and
critically and not just think of design
as something as the products of design
in the systems are something that we're
gifting to marginalized community
about how are we empowering them to
think themselves to improve their
communities I'm so yeah that was just
but the panel like to comment on how you
do this with your students how you have
people think about the role of the zone
and so I'll make the comment that one
the clot in the collaborative classes
that happen especially with RISD brown
students and within the RISD community I
think there's a lot of design learning
that happens between students that
happens between you know the
collaborative class with shoe students
there from all different disciplines we
have glassblowing and obviously ID
apparel illustration and to watch them
problem-solve creating a functional sole
of the shoe and having the ID student
help the glassblowing student to create
the form and then you know have the
illustration students show how they can
really draw the pattern to create the
upper of the shoe I think there's a very
strong collaborative aspect that happens
in this community especially with brown
and RISD and I think that is a pivotal
point of problem solving and is that do
you think is that a model for working
with broader communities because the
question raised is really what gives us
as designers the right to can I think
about it interject yeah I mean at least
like here I think the problem yes
excellent question the problem is with
the word empowerment we feel by using we
are going to empower this community you
have already taken you know the model
upper ground right the computer
community is already thinking you know
we're not going to empower them or teach
them to design think and all that the
workers think right i mean that's the
ranch es big thing is just we don't have
the tools to see how they think yeah so
the point is to learn ourselves how
someone who works from nine to five
thanks and there's creativity in that
mode of thinking we've imagined
creativity is this flexible thing that
happens at middle of the night you know
in the mood to lay it out
you know when you're the bottle of
scotch is like you know so all its
mythologize it and not be out of you
know because of a certain historical
moment demands of capital asked us to be
so flexible right so you think that you
can only be creative when you have the
privilege to think of time in this
flexible way but there's bike see
creativity in there's little see
creativity well I'm sorry sorry stated
what there's big seat creativity like
big genius creativity and there's little
secret if ax t like no no no no I what
do you mean by Big C creativity by what
you're critiquing is big secret to
become idea verify oh ok ok so we give
the big secret little secret it's more
important I mean little things exactly
ok so we know I Lily your fire does this
work yeah ok can I respond to Israel
because I I use that word empowerment
and I and I actually do believe that we
have a role to play I want to your safe
your age I want to respond to sage to
because first of all when we go into a
place we are not becoming local we know
all too well that we are not of that
place and we only go into places where
we're actually invited to come and to
share to share something and to learn
something it's absolutely a two way road
and it we're working with very
traumatized in Sri Lanka we're working
with the truly traumatized society and
they are not empowered they are not
empowered in the sense that they have
been overridden by a government that is
dictatorial that would like to see the
population sail off into the skies and
never come back they don't have a voice
politically they have gotten to the
point where they can't even believe they
have the ability to fix their own water
pump I mean these are not these are
people who at least believe they are not
empowered and so each loan sorry dr.
demian Lily's gonna empower you if you
don't
no but I but I actually I understand
what you're saying and I totally
appreciate your you know your your
cautioning us about being you know
either thinking we're somehow a savior
or where you know we're we have the
answers I don't I mean I I agree with
what Charlie said I go in as a human I
don't go in as a designer absolutely in
your context I mean I'm just to clarify
in your context exactly you need that
but I'm talking a head a different
context in mind but I think I think this
is yeah I think this I'm going to
Caroline I think this is all about
figuring out how to roll up your sleeves
and get in there and do work with people
in different contexts Caroline I guess
one way that I try and run meetings that
are related to this disaster of urban
renewal for example and all of the
buildings that were bulldozed in New
York City that did not become beautiful
futures for many communities and instead
remain asphalt and sometimes become
community gardens is to start community
meetings around any new idea by saying
who's been here for one year two years
five years ten years keep your hand up
if you were born and raised here and
then start with a conversation about
what plans have been proposed before and
what happened just so we all remember
that and then as a teacher I try and
have students design for the classroom
itself because i think it's sometimes
issue with design where people say i
don't understand why it wasn't
implemented or why it wasn't continued
why wasn't this garden taken care of for
years and then if you try and give
yourself a solution and you have to
manage it as a classroom for the entire
semester and you have to continue to
deal with your potentially agonistic
intimacy's your solutions for your
fellow students and you're confronted
with a lot of the realities that for
example we are coming from so many
different places and even in the class
there's conflict and people are coming
from the so-called communities that are
supposed to be saved by the institution
so I think bringing it back to the
classroom and saying what is working
here what is not working here how do we
redesign the furniture how do we
redesign the way we speak to each other
and then how is that failing is one way
to not imagine that we can save other
people before we try and deal with the
massive being with ourselves are there
any other questions from the audience I
was going to put one more question to
the panel which is but I don't want to
cut off anybody in the audience you
Damien I'll ask question um do you think
given we've had a very rich in a
disciplinary discussion a day it's
always interesting for me to think about
who's here we've got Lilly who's a
designer with the PhD in history we've
got Beth anthropologist VI we've got an
hour history bi we've got Daniel pelts
over their former sociology and
anthropology major do so we've got lots
of mixings we had a very mixed
discussion let me ask you a political
discussion about our institution have we
done a good job in in building the kinds
of design education knowledge is plural
that could allow us to build the kinds
of worlds that would like to bring into
being and I'm specifically thinking of
RISD here well that's easy well I don't
know if it's politically correct to
answer this question but all I'll save
you have tenure don't you
barely um I think the thing I think
there's a couple things at RISD it's
great and that sometimes people don't
pay a whole lot of attention to what
you're doing so you can try new things
write a new topic for class but it also
means that without great force of
character things don't continue because
there's not institutional support and
I'm thinking force of character lily and
her her design lab right that's all just
her this whole time until I think very
recently so so I think there's that it's
a mixed bag on some level like I said
because no one's really paying attention
you can do some very interesting things
but trying to have build momentum you
need more than just you to build that
momentum and I think then it's it's hard
to get the institutional support you
might need to because students come and
go right but to keep a project moving
forward is I think quite difficult I
just say one quick thing listen to the
students the students are the glue that
hold it all together and if you can
create that's how you create the
institutional memory in the absence of
games if they leave and so yeah they
there's new ones coming all the time in
there right now they're great and it's
it's understanding student community and
understanding how students under what
they want out of their experience here
and listening to that rather than I mean
I think sometimes faculty can be very
distance from that distant from that and
I think that that's not that's sometimes
why things don't continue i think is
because just make one comment to that
because that gets confusing because that
goes back to Carolyn's point about
wanting a job at the end of it at the
end of the day they want a job so you
know pushing the pedagogy and constantly
making it morph to the final need of
what they want it's both but that's
Kathleen because you teach in a field
where they get a job but
not everybody here does smoke it should
be Cole earning it should be both should
be developing the curriculum in the
ethos of the institution and it
shouldn't be top-down and it should be
all bottom-up but you meet in the middle
I agree and I think to pick up on what
Anne said I think you know our students
we every year cry at graduation because
we lose people that we don't want to
lose but I would actually argue that the
school is getting a little better in not
losing its graduates that we actually
are building a bigger network of alums
and current students and faculty and you
know Gwen who's there is is one of the
people who's really leading the effort
to try to to have the residents of RISD
be out in the world in an ongoing way
where we are not so centralized but we
actually have a decentralized aspect
where where our alums are empowered to
be part of who we are and and you know
that the kid that the teaching that the
learning which we all do you know we I
think we are also moving toward a moment
where the line between teacher and
learners not so clear which i think is
great and and it is going to have a
bigger ripple effect and there are a lot
of things here happening now that are
going in the right direction so you know
as they say the ark may be long but it's
heading in the right direction I think
that too I think also that that this
event and particularly the collection of
RISD Brown collaborations are one of the
best signs about moving that in the
right direction and the same community
right and we but we have failed to
function that way and we have not often
had this level of discussion amongst
ourselves which is I think and in the
broader community I think that's really
important I don't want to end this
without answering the questions that
were asked at the beginning here and I
just want to say it's yes yes and yes
thank you I just had a lot of the things
we talked about today are featured on
the website CDC f org there's articles
from some of the speakers today we'll be
posting video hopefully soonish of
today's proceedings and we hope you guys
stay in contact and stay stay connected
to these conversations because they're
really important and thank you to Damian
and in for really pulling all this
together
