okay are we good Andrew thumbs up okay
welcome I'm Damien Whitehead of history
philosophy social sites at RISD welcome
to critical design critical futures 2016
this is a lecture and symposium series
that a group of colleagues from brown
and RISD have developed over the last
three years the idea of this has been to
open up spaces in our community to think
about the relations between critical
design very broadly conceived and the
critical social sciences and critical
theory once again very broadly conceived
so I just want to draw your attention to
the fact that this lecture is one of
three critical design critical future
events going on this week from Friday
tomorrow between six and seven thirty we
have an exhibition of student work
entitled reimagining Providence and this
is going to go on at the Waterman
gallery and it's speculative imaginaries
on urban ecological futures and much of
that work will come out of the amazing
studio of an Tate this semester so
that's going to be a lot of fun six
o'clock just in the nature lab pop in
have a drink and have a look at some
horizons of future possibilities for
Providence and then on Saturday morning
between nine thirty and 1230 we're going
to have the second critical design
critical futures symposium entitled
bigger plus small top down plus bottom
up rethinking sustainable design at
futuring and we will have their Hillary
Brown whose principal of new Civic works
and founder of the city of New York's
office of sustainable design and she's
written a really fascinating book called
next-generation infrastructure
future-proofing for the Anthropocene and
we're going to bring her into
conversation with antiqued once again
Charlie cannon the great in Gonchar from
brown
Claudia rebola and tonight's speaker so
so come along again it's a short half
Bay symposium it's going to be fun we're
going to buzz around a lot of ideas and
hopefully think about how on the on the
hundredth anniversary of Jane Jacobs is
it time to go beyond the jane jacobs of
Robert Moses debate and think about big
and small in different kinds of ways you
know so and pele will be there tonight
there on Saturday to talk about social
innovation and all his work on social
innovation which is present in this
great MIT bookmaking futures okay so let
me just say a very brief few words about
pill a.m. it's my royal pleasure to
introduce polite to RISD Pele's
presently a professor of design at the
University of Malmo and it's very
exciting for all of us to have him at
RISD for many reasons and he and his
colleagues in Scandinavia spread across
many disciplines really have I think
launched my mind some of the most
interesting and innovative attempts to
envisage a humanist design prod politics
over the last four decades I think he's
been involved in many projects which
have really genuinely attempted to
realize and envisage forms of design and
practice forms a design that are deeply
embedded in the ongoing struggle to
realize a more socially just tolerant
and democratic future his body of
thought has an body of work has ranged
from remarkable projects in the 70s and
80s focused on developing forms of
worker orientated design through the
utopia and deimos projects in
Scandinavia which think you'll talk a
little bit about today and this produced
the tomb worker orientated design of
computer artifacts which is fascinating
text and I think you can actually
download a lot of it for free now on the
internet
so worth checking out he wrote a
critically important manifesto for a
digital Bauhaus in the late 90s which
was hugely influential his work played a
critical role in developing the
participant participatory design field
in Scandinavia and most recently he's
been very involved in discussions about
critical futuring and social innovation
so I had a great pleasure to interview
Pell last summer in Copenhagen about his
body of work and it was a real pleasure
to to do that and he was very modest
about that and under playing his role
but when I went to a conference later in
Sweden everyone was saying yet he's the
critical person you know he really
played important roles I'll embarrass
him there but it was also interesting to
come back and come back to the United
States and find myself and find
ourselves in a presidential primary a
competition where one candidate in
particular mentioning no names felt it
necessary to declare at one point I
loved Denmark but we are not Denmark we
are the United States of America so you
know isn't it wasn't an interesting
moment in the the politics of the last
six months or so that that needed to be
said okay but nevertheless to tonight
we're going to think about a Danish and
scandinavian and swedish possibilities
and histories Peller said in his writing
that this is perhaps a story of
democratic dreams and lost utopia's
maybe it's a maybe it's a tale of tales
from another land but maybe in part as
well perhaps it could be seen as
offering tales of other possible moderna
T's moderna tease which have not yet
been fully realized and may still come
about in other directions so I'll let
you be the judge of that and so Pell
will speak for about 40 minutes or so
then we'll have some discussions I'm
delighted to have Camille her heiress
who is labor organizer
from the George Wallace Center in
Pawtucket and we also have professor
Lily Dean professor of landscape
architecture and architecture from RISD
here who will be engaging as respondents
and I'm hoping we can do some nice
back-and-forth and really draw you all
into the discussion so without further
ado please give a warm welcome to pel
pel am
okay thank you for inviting me here when
I was invited I maybe no one how did
know what kind of discussion that would
be in the u.s. about a democratic
socialism and as so what i will do is
that i offer one account not from New
England but from from old Scandinavia
arm relations between you say democratic
socialism and end design and it's going
to be a very personal story I I've been
I'm not as old as burning yeah but I I'm
a retired professor so I started to be
engaged in this kind of questions in the
yeah in 68 ahem and as a researcher and
design researcher ever since so what I
tried what I will do is they'll try to
take you along on my journey with a
shortstop on on on every decade from 70s
and up to now and I'm not suggesting
even if I've been here for a week now in
New England and I've seen Norway I've
seen Denmark I've seen Sweden as places
in New England but I'm not suggesting
that one can just transport these
experiences to another country I'm and
as you will hear a mine I'm not
pessimistic but I'm not overly
optimistic either yeah I the stands
come to take over the year and being in
this field for for 40 years or something
like that is what today we'll probably a
label as a melancholic design not
without hope but understanding that you
have small little moments of success and
then things go in another direction but
you still keep on looking for the
glimmerings of hope and where the
possibilities are to go on again and
again and again so but that was kind of
giving away a little bit of the
conclusion but let's get started so am i
called this is like this this thing
Scandinavian participatory design in
retrospective I'll call it Democratic
design experiments isn't the small so
when I look back at it I think that is
what we've been involved in and the
history I'm trying to to talk to you
about starting salaries which what I
call the first collective turn had to do
with democracy at work that the first
designed turn with had to do with work
oriented design in the Atheist the
Senate second collected turn will have
to do with cooperated oh yeah designed
in computer systems in critical
computing the second design turn which
had to do with the building of a digital
Bauhaus and finally the third collective
turn in which we are now with both has
to do with with marginal and Kozma
political design collectives and publix
in the making so that's kind of the the
story that I preferred to tell about the
Scandinavian experience and one thing
just to before we start the way I think
of design these days or or participatory
design is as I said about a as
democratic design experiments in this
mall and buy that I'm thinking of design
not as a production
of objects not not as a laboratory
experience pavement experience only but
as the design of objects and the rim and
the laboratory and the experiment but
also the Parliament the Democratic
discussion and the thing the Assembly of
the actors around the object so I'm
thinking of this these small things as
as the flickering moments between
laboratory and Parliament between in
sampling an object and crucial question
are all the time questions of
participation who is invited to host let
out and questions the representation how
do we represent who is being represented
what is being represented represented
how do we how do we represent so that's
my little theoretical frame for for this
and the first collective turn we're now
in the in the 70s and the focus is in
oslo in norway and and it on the right
message at the time marker it's about
the same time or a little bit earlier
than the level one yes to see where we
are in time yeah and what what's this
starts out in the aftermath of of 68 and
in Sweden Norway and Denmark there's a
lot of discussion about industrial
democracy and taking democracy also
beyond the factory gate and into the
offices our prime minister later
assassinated oh la palma declared the
70s to be the decayed when democracy and
to the workplace not to say that that
happens away that was but the
environment had to do with new laws and
agreement for
for for workers participation something
that was very much debated was something
called wage earner funds that means that
instead of demanding always higher wages
in the most profitable companies people
would that would instead be funds
building up resources that were
controlled by by the workers in
different kinds of of organization and
this was then turned round later on and
so on but but it was was an interesting
transformative moment or at least so it
seemed and the question was how to do
with what could and and this is also the
period when the computer is entering the
workplace in terms of production
planning systems and said drive well
there was in a couple of years there was
the first the apple one but but
computers at that time were more like
the size of this room and couldn't do
very much yeah so it's it's in the midst
of this bad air at the moment a comes
out and I should make me start that
story in in Norway as that yeah the
Norwegian metal workers union were very
worried about what this new technology
was and how could ya what should they do
they had no I didn't have a clue and
they were and they went to a design or
or or two near a weaving computing
center and ask what should we do and
they've got a very nice report and what
play was this meant but that was just a
report that ended up in the bookshelves
these kind of reports do and nothing
happens so they came back and said that
we want something to happen and in
Norway at that time they had a strong
popular movement against Norwegians part
of the European
economic community and they developed a
strategy based on the undie ography cut
off of norway which meant that they had
to work have very long strong local
activities and that what that when april
so they simply took that strategy and
implemented it within the trade unions
to say that a trade unions locally
should get support for how to negotiate
on a system of new technology and
textbooks should be produced etc so and
this model then a spread throughout
Scandinavia a combined with another
inspiration that is further away from
what from from Brazil and and the work
bye-bye Marxist Tod impaired paulo
ferreira and who had worked in feylis
with with with alphabetization but again
in a way where is use of learning and
alphabet and reading were linked to
broader issues and opening up so this
this was the kind of background from
which a witness started still it would
be too much to say that this was there
was a participatory design but was it it
was an opening to see how people more
democratically could participate in in
the if not the silence at least
implement implementation of technology
in the workplace
here's an example from one one of the
work places where it's up where where I
had the chance to participate was a
locomotive repair shop and the average
age of the workers were 55 years and I
was just around 30 and they had they had
some worries about about about some
technology was going to be introduced
and we came with the what we call the
demons project and it had a lot of you
know lamese overheads done enough
everyone who remember them presented
like 20 of them and and it had to be on
a meeting with more people than this and
they should vote for it otherwise we
would not do it and they voted for it
and have so and then we started to
working these work groups locally and I
think six months down the line over a
beer they asked us do you want to know
why why we voted for going into this
yeah sure and they say that and well
first of all we didn't understand
that what you were saying but you seem
like nice guys and we have two other
members to vote for it but so but six
months down the line we've earned them
enough trust to have an open discussion
and that's something that I think I've
brought with me ever since is this that
you have to build a trustful relation of
why I say it just won't work you cannot
come and be a smart designer and some
people what to do yeah yeah I won't go
into what we're worried because it's
kind of a lot of interesting ideas
developed in this period but it's too
depressing to compare not with what we
have today so I'll leave that for the
moment you can read about it now you can
talk about it in the discussion so we
move up to the 80s and
this is the time where the app Eliza and
and the first Macintosh in 84 is coming
so it to me we're starting out before
that but in the similar time and now
activity is a maybe stronger in
Stockholm in Sweden and Denmark then
then then in Oslo and this is this is
the period of of work oriented design
and a very simple idea that all over the
Western world him printers graphic
workers and printing industry was in the
crisis especially in newspapers and
people were laid off the strike the
strategy we strike did not work they
were still losing jobs and yeah
Washington Post they they smash to hire
people in Murdock started a
non-unionized factory for electric
workers in the in Wapping outside London
to get to get rid of it of organized
work so it was a really tough time was
there a strategy that could that could
work under those conditions and it so
the nerdy graphic workers went together
and it said that yeah we'll be
interested in see if we can develop a
kind of production system for for
newspaper production that maintain
skilled work even if there will be fewer
for your jobs unless this will be done
in a participatory way so that's how we
started the utopia project this was at a
time when when technology looked like
this section of the page down there is
from Pasadena star-news at that time and
but the real breakthrough in this
project we can say I thought we produced
lots of really nice blueprints of this
new technology and how it could work and
the graphic workers were really pleased
with this but it turned out that we did
not really communicate all these
flowcharts drawings etc and were not the
door in their language and they were
pleased with it because we were their
experts and and and so understanding
that we had to try to to rethink how we
were designing and this is this is part
of the bit of the breakthrough in in the
project remember this is 1981-82 and and
these are mock-ups of mice or for for
the for the computer how should it be in
graphic work how could it could it look
and these were designed by the
industrial designers in our group and
and I should not going to the detail
stories about a the moment or break
through with this but the interesting
thing is that we did first just think of
these mock-ups or prototypes there but
it turned out that this was Lynn is an
essential part of the participatory
design strategy to work with with
mock-ups and prototypes as mocking up
and prototyping a shared experience
around the building of other
mock-ups of shared artifacts and an
incoming system and that did not only
have to be their artifacts this is us
we saw in the basement in rochester
institute of technology in 82 something
they call the desktop placement that
could be able to print on normal paper
and it would not work cost more than
twenty thousand dollars it's a really
cheap sling for purdue for doing that i
have and no one believed in it but if
one had a thing like that that could
change how to organize work between
different categories between journalists
or mark a person people and and and
printers so experiments could be set up
around that but in the air so in the end
based on graphic workers skills this
systems was a the system were produced
and tested out and in a couple of
newspapers and collaboration was started
with with with the great in london
enterprise board who had a company
called Whitechapel that could produce
this but this was just before this was
all abandoned by by by Thatcher and the
whole structure will but the real
breakthrough a horse came in 84 with
with the first Mac on a much much
cheaper technology a lot of the stuff
could be done and two years later this
the publishing was a was a fact
implementing maybe eighty percent of our
own specifications so that was end of
that project as a as a technological
innovation but at the same times a lot
of things have been learned about how to
organize a design processes how to have
experience from that go into a
collective agreements on work
organization etc so let's move up to up
to the 90s and for me personally that
also meant moving from from Stockholm
where I lived before two horas in them
on and this is the time for for for it
for the Newton and then the first
macbook that's about where we're we're
on Mac was delivered late in this and
and I'd moved to a to my colleagues in
orders in Denmark who which started to
be a hub for critical computing and
design but when I came there the faculty
decided that I could not I could not get
the position there because that would
scare away all their important American
colleagues who wouldn't who did real
computer science and and work clothes
they close friends and I hi I didn't
have a PhD so I only have written other
books so it was easy to turn it down the
side and even if I decided I would never
be an academic it ended up to with with
with writing this worker in sign of
ocular artifacts which was a way to see
could we have the computer science based
on it on design which was a good
challenge and they don't take a few
years to become a professor after that
yeah but in this environment this
environment and it was very crucial to
the meeting between especially the the
California West Coast a the u.s. west
coast and and Scandinavia on on a
participatory design so important I a
colleague's like Terry Winograd from
Stanford Lucy Satchmo from Xerox PARC
Liam banham from from San Diego and I
came over to oars and stayed there for
John Green gone from New York if any one
of you know she's been there it's been a
year there so it became a very
interesting melting pot between on the
one hand
say the emerging entrepreneurial climate
in in Silicon Valley which had a kind of
progressive touch and the Scandinavian
more traditional a socialist democratic
socialist approach to to work yeah yeah
and just to mention in the third or is
ham had I don't others action is the
only place I know what have descending
of conferences the first one was in 75
with Kristen I quarter was the the the
key person in starting all this and then
it's been 85 90 fireman's on until last
year and I've actually been to all the
conferences but so it still holds some
kind of um nexus 4 not design in general
but for for critical computing and and a
human computer interaction or or a
human-centered design so I'll move on to
the second design turn and this is this
is about the time for these things and
and maybe we talked about itunes earlier
today which is particularly ugly
artifact in the way that is I mean in
the way it's implemented as a way to
constrain who can participate and hope
and who cannot but we know more about
that later so in this time I mean this
is this is this is now the time of
the booming of the internet and and the
creative economy and new fields not only
industrial design but now interaction
design is emerging as a field and I was
a professor of the old University of a
of learned from 1600 something I don't
remember but and just 20 kilometers from
from learned is malmö which is a a
Harper city and that has many like mine
Chester England and many other had seen
his better days had been a big
industrial town there were planned
closures the the wharf was closing down
the car factory was closing down etc etc
yeah the usual story Annie and it wanted
to to change this and had a very strong
mayor when an important part of this
change was to have a University of their
own and I had a chance to be part of
building up the yard communication and
design part of that University which and
we cause at a digital Bauhaus not not
being not writing into that the the
Bowers as such in terms of the after or
elitist approach that it was in all this
good meaning but to take up the symbol
kind of challenges of how our technology
and society can can meet in one way or
another so that was that was a challenge
for that school and and I'll call that
the second i designed a design turned
and stamen mentioned we all even
produced a manifesto for a digital bas
to start that up and so m and so there
was a number of things
happening at that time when this was
started and and the school was very
success imeem it's not like Christie
this is there was a small place to begin
we only had 200 students and now it's
maybe thousand student there but we had
a chance to build it from scratch and
and we could do keep on doing
participatory design co design project
here's an example of 20 to my colleagues
to work with nurses at the main hospital
in mama and she work with to find out
how to work with informal learning how
to how to manage different machinery and
apparatus when there's not a colleague
around that can tell you this is all and
so they didn't app and this is long
before we had apps but on which small
little movies where could could could be
seen so there was to be a barcode on the
thing and you could take the barcode
reader and then you would get a
colleague would perform how to how to do
this and an eight it won lots of design
prices and I think a good moment was
when this when the national award for a
for best practice user enter design and
onstage for only the nurses none of the
designers and they got their PhD so they
this and and and says it's not a problem
with that but the attitude was that this
for this was the nurses system and and
so they were important designers than
this but this school of course I mean it
it built it did build on a on the it
served on the wave of the Internet and
the creative class but that also created
a big crash later on
because a lot of the finance are
expected other things than say
democratic experiments in in this mall
they expected new companies lots of
startups lots of lots of products that
made it word wine etc and some of that
came out justice insure comes comes out
from here but that was not the main
thing we were interested we're
interested in something that was much
more embedded in the social structure
especially in the in the local
environment so we actually had to think
no thank you too many of the offerings
and at the same time this is the time
when we have new public management
hitting bad is all over all over Europe
and to do as I've seen today to have a
real studio real studious for teaching
etc started to be more and more
difficult classes had to be twice the
size with the same number of teachers
etc so it was really hard to keep up
with the ideas though I'm very proud of
many of the other key things come out
from there is as design work so i have a
move on to the third collective turner
getting towards the end of the talk
still staying in mount em em so if yes
what i've got here we got these new
devices this is the time also for for
app store again someone taking control
over what is allowed to be an app or or
not yeah so where's we before had been
much engaged in
in in in the workplace and questions
started to pop up throat what are there
other practices that could be considered
work or related to work but it's not
carried out in the workplace as we knew
it so am so we started to be engaged
with the people in the city of moment
especially in in the in the lower income
areas and and and in the less in the
less privileged part of the city yeah
and and just see what could be done and
I will live and this is the same time as
a lot of things are happening around us
not least here in here in the US that
has in important ramifications of what
was going on but one important thing in
terms of design strategy was to stop to
be stopped to think about projects just
as we want some how to start a stop
think about the the cichlid secluded
clean object but about networks are an
entangled stuff think that a project is
not the right time frame projects will
you one has to be more sustainable than
the project if engagement has to be more
long-term so how can design an ensign
school or design firm build this up and
one way to do this has to do with a what
has gone under the name of living labs
and I know living labs could be anything
from user testing to the kind of more
hopefully more democratic public
engagement that
with the city that we've been involved
with and so that became the basis of how
we organize things we had to apply for
project money but kind of went into a
pool and then we had to wait for for the
opportunities to engage with different
actors over time and the book describes
for four areas of this kind of church
and it has to do with with are there
ways like like maker spaces etc that
could be a way of opening up production
at hinting at other possible ways for
instance with the use of guy thinking
about to make his basis as a kind of
commons hood could work in in the
neighborhoods a be a way where things
that I'm not considered as where people
are on welfare programs that still could
do some really interesting things even
if the trade unions would not be able to
be too happy about it and what water
models for that and how could people
work with that and an in the culture
sector a new ways of engaging in the
margin of the culture sector and last
but not least could design be part of
more democratic engagements in the
different forms of a public engagement
that we have so the experiments tell
stories from from that from from these
different kinds of fields so for
instance when it comes to designing
conditions for the social if there are
lots of experience me with collaborative
services and very often quite negative
experiences people do things that are
very interesting but for one or another
the city or someone else says that a we
will not support this in the end this
group of women from Iran Iraq
Afghanistan in Bosnia who had the very
simple idea of doing a support for
unaccompanied refugee children they had
counter competences they had and they
have language competences they had food
competencies etc liver and experiments
were done but in the end didn't fit in
with the with the with the trade union
system it did not fit in with the civil
servants responsibilities it didn't fit
in with the private company that took
over this because they were not willing
to pay to jail really to pay for the
service etc and so everyone is uploading
it a bar and then we had the the refugee
crisis later on but that's another story
so sorry again a lot of interesting
things happening that people are doing
but but not always with when I'm happy
outcome and when it comes to an to it to
make it spaces a similar experience
here's a very interesting makerspace
that we were involved with it was not
not not if a black the Fab Lab was part
of it but the important thing was to
have people with different backgrounds
working with different materials and see
what kind of of a communion that could
be built up around that not easy at all
the role of designer not obvious at all
though I'll say that it really helps to
be an industrial designer when you come
into such an environment compared to
just being an organizer and so this is
with after all quite quite well in in
some kind of heterogeneous a commerce so
and was basically learn from it it's not
that this is the model but some of the
of the
problems are building a heterogeneous
common Aramaic space but given the time
of a of neoliberalism hitting hard and
we had a new director of a research
center who was really knew all the news
peak and so we did not produce enough
companies in this makerspace not enough
jobs or wrong kind of jobs etc so
resources would withdrawn and take him
back to the University and we should
have a great connectivity lab with all
the resources all the machines big party
opening it and so on and it never took
off but because it was very
disappointing to have the resources we
organized in that direction and then
this this year we're starting last year
there came another opening which was
much more interesting namely that could
this make a space move into one of the
less adventures a let's say one of the
more disadvantaged areas in in mom and
join a maker space with a recycling
station and as part of of community
building other and that's going on just
as we're talking and to me really
interesting ones happenings and then and
what I want to tell with this story is
that well it started with fabric and
this maker space which still exists and
then but and then it was this real bit
backlash with the connectivity lab and
you say end of story but this going away
from the project and rather thinking
long term with living lines or thinking
or infrastructural have that comes
opening so to this there's always these
glimmers of hope and then someone like
Anna Sarah
you there industrial designer from a
formula and she she's prepared to go
into their into that and that if this
will be a disaster or not we don't know
but just now it looks very promising so
to finish beyond all this and this is a
now beyond where where I can tell much
is when I see what the the young
designers and design researchers are
involved in in in now in in the third
collective term it's being more and more
interested in engaging beyond the good
humans in engaging engaging with with
with the participation of of a of others
be them human or non-human the example
turn to the right some colleagues that
right now are working on em on the on
worms that eat plastic you probably
heard about these worms that that is a
certain kind of plastic and said that
the experiment people have them in their
home and and and and and the and the
worms eat is plastic and in principle
this is protein so you can also eat the
worms and of course this is a critical
design and of experiment but but it's
just too to start to question some of
our take it for granted ideas about how
to design and and others have started I
mean coming from this democratic design
experiment participatory design
tradition which sometimes seem to be a
bit naive not like like I described us
in the beginning with a with a
with the load in the locomotive repair
shop project if people say that earth
things are good doesn't mean that they
are really participating or that they're
really having so colleagues have worked
with when elderly and with others and
found out that to quote the service
tenure we are not very good at listening
to the murmurings of the Egypt the idiot
not meaning is something meaning
something negative here but meaning
those that don't count in the way that
we want them to count and how to become
better to listen to them yeah this I
don't think this is participatory design
today this is what I tried to say and
this is a final vision some of you I
have watched the bridge or or read about
the millennium and lisbeth salander or
could Philander in the serum yep and
this Canadian participation code design
in retrospective for me has a lot in
common with with with nordic noir and i
would describe it as a kind of a
melancholic design it's not it's not
something that is without hope but it's
like you have small little successes but
it's also a lot of our backlashes and in
the midst of all of this as Verlander
the anti-hero of healing minecraft I
would say and yeah we must stand up for
democracy thank
