okay thank you everybody for coming
welcome to questioning aesthetics
symposium I am Yuriko Saito professor of
philosophy at RISD and co-organizer of
this symposium finally that they arrived
to reap the reward of a year and half of
planning this symposium is a
collaborative project between misty and
transdisciplinary aesthetics foundation
and was made possible with funding from
both organizations I will ask its
founder and director Michael Kelly to
speak about the foundation's mission and
the context for this symposium after my
introduction for RISD this symposium is
timely as we are becoming increasingly
aware of the vital importance of
academic research in art and design
education and practice it is our hope
that the presentations and discussion
during these two days will provide a
platform for further exploration of
aesthetics in today's world art making
and design practice as somebody who
study and teach aesthetics I firmly
believe that the power of aesthetics is
immense though often underestimated and
it has a crew it has a critical role to
play in the humanities collective and
ongoing world making project for better
or worse this recognition is
particularly important at RISD because
all of our students our future world
makers in the most literal sense now if
it takes a whole village to raise a
child it certainly took a whole risky
village to make this kind of event
possible it's true I want to thank the
tremendous support I received both in
kind and funding from many parts of
risky and this is quite lengthy happily
the office of the provost office of dean
of faculty division of the warts
division of experimental foundational
studies division of fine arts division
of architectural design graduate studies
department of history of art and visual
culture department history philosophy
social sciences department of literary
arts and studies department
department of illustration Department of
Industrial Design Museum office of
intercultural student engagement office
of research and partner program and the
library pew it's a happily along this I
also want to give special thanks to the
following people Patti Phillips who was
my busy co-organizer Nico rose Iraqis
and Daniel hewitt from research office
Nico is somebody I call my lifeline
Emily begging and Mark Baum pieria from
the library Amy Patenaude from graduate
studies scarlet men from graphic design
and Andy grant who is our tech guru
always in the back room so so thank I
want to like special thanks to those
people we designed the program to be
weighted toward discussion so each
presentation by 18 eminent scholars and
artists is kept intentionally short at
15 minutes it's really short we will
also keep the introduction of each
speaker to the minimum just the name and
affiliation and each speaker short bio
is included in the program booklet that
you will hopefully cut at the entrance
and you can also visit our website
listed on the first page of the spook
'let for a more longer bio for each
speaker and there is one change to the
program are not content but that share
ship the chair for the second session
this morning on aesthetics and ethical
making will be Damian white associate
professor of sociology and head of
department history for three social
sciences and Tate who was going to chair
as a family obligation and unfortunately
cannot come so she sends her regrets now
since I have the podium let me make a
pitch about a new RISD publication
perspectives on contemporary aesthetics
though not planned or related the
publication of this book coincided with
the symposium this is another
collaborative project between risky and
the journal contemporary aesthetics and
its editor Arnold billion happens to be
our first speaker and now
full disclosure I am its associate
editor this book is a collection of 17
articles from the past twelve volumes of
the journal and designed by the Dean of
architecture and design Nancy scholars
and executed by a graphic design
graduate students Khalid men the book
itself is an aesthetic object a uniquely
and quintessentially risley product
copies are available for perusal and
possible purchase at the store outside
the auditorium so please take a look
during the break all the proceeds go to
risky so I don't have any conflict of
interest in promoting this book so now
that me introduce Michael Kelly he is
another co-organizer of the symposium
founder and director of
transdisciplinary aesthetics foundation
professor of philosophy at the
University of North Carolina at
Charlotte and editor-in-chief of the
Encyclopedia of aesthetics published by
oxford university press the second
edition of the enpsychopedia came out
two summers ago and I should mention
that several of the symposium speakers
for this symposium contributed entries
to the enpsychopedia please welcome
Michael Kelly good morning so thank you
to all the people that you we go thanks
I won't we read her list but as you said
it's great that it's a long list let me
just say a couple words about the three
letters of the transdisciplinary
aesthetics foundation the T the a and
the FS starting with the F the
foundation is a tax-exempt nonprofit
private foundation you can read more
about it at trans aesthetics foundation
org the main purpose of it so far has
been to organize and support the
questioning aesthetics symposium series
this is the fourth of the series there
are three more coming up between now and
June there another a dozen that are in
the works
in various stages of planning and
someone in Barcelona and when Sarah is
in Dublin and various other places as
well as with many cities in the country
so please take a look at we have video
recordings as we will hear of this
symposium so you can see what concretely
we're trying to to try to do so the aim
for the what we say the questioning
aesthetics the idea there is that the
questioning is that aesthetics has been
the object of critique for decades under
the anti aesthetic stance or the anti
aesthetic regime and I think that's no
longer the case aesthetics is more in
the position of being the subject or the
agent of questioning including the
questioning of aesthetics but many other
things from from art to prisons to
various other topics which is a quite
original now for the aesthetics my
general characterization of it what
doing encyclopedia is that aesthetics is
critical thinking about art culture
nature design everyday life and many
other things it doesn't have necessarily
a particular object or object the main
of its own it's quite open in that sense
and part of the purpose of the symposium
series is to understand exactly the
extent of that range and to see what's
going on and much of it is happening
outside of philosophy is that it is part
of philosophy but just as art developed
long before the museum was sort of
entrapped in the museum for a while it's
now Frida's of the museum in a sense
aesthetics as sensation perception
sensibility existed long before
aesthetics was a part of philosophy and
it has reclaimed that broader notion so
it's still importantly part of
philosophy but but much much richer than
that so the last part of the TAF going
backward is
transdisciplinary I mean the aesthetics
outside of philosophy involves many
other kinds of disciplines obviously art
history literary theory and so on but
also geography neuroscience race Theory
feminism a lot of other fields or
disciplines and so on so to practice
aesthetics means to do it in a
transdisciplinary way the question is
how do you do that and that again is one
of the purposes of the symposium
bringing people as we've done here who
are from different disciplines to try to
understand what people are doing under
the general name of of aesthetics and
see you see how we can carry it forward
the last word is for now is is the last
session we have is the salon or a
roundtable and one of the questions
which I wanted to raise for the speakers
of participants but the to all of you
the audience as well because the
discussion format is meant to include
the audience is to look back at the end
of the symposium what has gone for study
so what people have said about it
explicitly or implicitly or otherwise to
think generally what is that xscape or
word so with that a stop and we can
start with the first session so thank
