how is the sound can you hear me pretty
good okay great so welcome everyone to
and also artists and designers writing
this is a symposium exploring a unique
form of duel practice that of the artist
or designer who also writes I'm Jennifer
lease and I'm the director of the RISD
Writing Center Patti Phillips Dean of
Graduate Studies who you met at the door
with the program and I are co-teaching a
graduate course right now in which the
students are both the editors of and the
writers for a graduate student
publication so today's symposium will
give all of them a view into how this
kind of editing and writing happens out
in the world outside of RISD and I'm
sure that what we learned today will
inform our publication which I hope
you'll all keep an eye out for come
about May but why are we opening up this
conversation to all of you outside of
the context of the course why are
artists and designers writings important
to all of us here today it may be
because you are an artist or designer
who also writes or you want to write or
you want to write more it may be because
you love to read artists and designers
writings which have a long and storied
lineage from early 20th century
manifestos to the criticism and
experimental writings of say Donald Judd
and Robert Smithson in the 60s and 70s
to AI weiwei's blog posts today in which
he talks about art and architecture and
politics and activism we're interested
too because today artists and designers
writings are wildly proliferating
appearing in public forums ranging from
creative time reports to Triple Canopy
to design observer to the new inquiry to
paper monument to praxis all of them
boldly featuring artists and designers
writings like never before and then of
course there are artists who are self
publishing if any of you were at the
recent New York art book fair you know
what I'm talking about it's it's booming
we're compelled because we know that
kinetic knology and the internet have
chain
changed and are continuing to change
writing in ways we don't yet fully
understand what we do know is that the
alphabetic linguistic foundations of
writing are increasingly complemented by
oral kinetic hyperlinked interactive and
most of all visual modes of expression
and in this newly expanded multi-sensory
writing ecology we might just wonder
whether artists and designers have
special rhetorical powers or whether
writing is even an expansive enough term
for what we're talking about with the
future of print and writing itself up in
the air not to mention an increasing
distrust of master narratives we know
that we have something to learn from
artists and designers writings which
like art and design themselves so often
tread fearlessly into the unknown and
speak truth to power but I think I'm
getting ahead of ourselves I'm going to
review our afternoon and we'll see many
of these ideas and issues unfold
throughout the day so as you'll see in
your program and if you didn't get one
on your way in there's more in the back
and feel free to grab one we have two
sets of presentations each are followed
by a Q&A and then a collective
conversation with all of our six
presenters and then we'll have a little
bit more conversation out in the lobby
from five to six with wine and cheese to
sustain us on the first panel we have
three editors of artists and designers
writings and on the second we have three
artists and designers who themselves are
writers and all of them will be sharing
their own work and then in the
conversation we hope that that will spin
off into some of our shared interests
and questions so thank you all for
coming and thank you very much to the
RISD museum thank you Sarah for so
kindly co-sponsoring this event and I'm
so pleased to introduce our first
speaker amanda visser lawrence is a
practicing architect and she teaches at
Northeastern University and she's the
co-founding editor
or the founding co-editor of praxis a
journal of writing and building and in
all cases will keep our introductions of
our speakers brief but you have longer
biographies in your programs so please
help me welcome Amanda good afternoon
Thank You Jennifer and thank you patty
for inviting me to be here today I don't
think I've ever had the opportunity to
speak about praxis which is an
architectural journal the byline is
actually journal of writing plus
building but I've never actually had a
chance to think through the writing part
in in this kind of venue and I'm so
grateful for that and today with a
really esteemed group of colleagues and
in a really diverse mix I usually speak
to audiences of architects or
architecture students and practices the
journal that features architecture but
we also from the beginning and in a way
that I don't think I ever was able even
to articulate to myself always had the
writing piece was an important aspect of
it so what I'd like to take an
opportunity to do this afternoon is is
show you some examples from the journal
talk a little bit about the founding of
the journal and hopefully start to
suggest some questions about this role
of designers writing and what how I
approach editing also of designers
writing so like I said practices a
journal it's a 128-page a non-commercial
journal of architecture of the americas
that i co-founded in 1998 that is really
a long time ago now with a woman named
ashley schaeffer we were students at
Columbia University finishing the
masters of architecture program and
really naively sort of said you know
there aren't really any good magazines
maybe we should just start our own and
so we did I'm happy to talk more about
that process maybe in the Q&A but um but
I wanted to actually start with a quote
that was really important to us as we
began this process and which now in the
context of today's symposium I think it
takes on an importance as well and this
was a quote from a an Italian architect
named of
torical teen Grigori was a well-known
architect and also editor of a magazine
called Casa Bella an important
architecture magazine and he had this
quote that really spoke to us as
architects who were embarking on this
process of editing and he talks about
the fact that editing a magazine he puts
editing a magazine as a part of a kind
of larger research and design practice
right so like teaching or participating
in public debates is a way of
cultivating theoretical reflection not
as a separate activity but as an
indispensable part of design craft and I
think that is an important quote and for
us that always meant that this is a kind
of holistic that we didn't see editing
as something separate from what we did
as architects I should say also that I'm
not really i'm actually a licensed
architect but not a practicing architect
i'm now I have a PhD and I teach the
architectural history and theory courses
but for the idea that that wasn't
something that you did outside of your
work as an architect but the same kind
of process of inquiry as a designer that
you brought to a design problem that was
the same way we were thinking about
editing a journal that was really
powerful for us and I think that's
powerful in the context of today's
conversation too we've produced 15
journals I hesitate to even call praxis
a journal because it takes us a long
time to make one so and I can tell you
we have lots of angry subscribers
writing where is my issue but I think
serial publication is probably a better
term but that's our first issue from
1999 when we were just coming out of
Columbia the fiction image of the
bernard tschumi learner center which was
just being completed that on columbia at
the time and then our most recent issue
from a couple years ago where we looked
at i'm actually the way that architects
tells stories there's a little hiatus
because we also produce the um we were
part of the team at the venice biennale
last year and we produced the agenda the
catalog that came they came out with a
Biennale but so this issue I think shows
so each issues um Attica Lee organized
and within the context of the issue we
feature architects writings and
architects buildings and that the the
writing piece these are some early on
logos as we were trying to conceptualize
the journal I kind of like the fuzzy
pixelated calling out the slide has
gotten so old but the the name traxxas
was important to us and I haven't
thought about the
so long but the runner-up so praxis we
were unaware of the Marxist connotations
this is back to the naivet√© thing but
for us praxis was just an important word
because it suggested the translation of
theory into practice and that's what we
were excited about with architecture we
wanted to look at projects that we felt
like we're translating theoretical
concepts into actual built artifacts but
the runner up was epigraph an epigraph
is you know words that are written on
buildings and since we were a journal of
writing plus building the plus now feels
very late 90s but that never the writing
plus building that epigraph to the end
seemed a little too like neocon sounding
and it was sort of on the heels of
post-modernism so we didn't want anyone
to think that we were opposed so we went
with praxis um but but it was always for
us praxis was away and this again in the
context of today's conversation I think
is important where we situated ourselves
very deliberately between what were then
the two dominant modes of architectural
publications one of which were really
heavy Theory densely textual very mildly
illustrated journals like assemblage
assemblage was edited by K Michael Hayes
who actually later became my doctoral
advisor which is kind of funny but um so
we were reacting against that model
which there's a lot think a lot of
doulas Foucault derrida images of
buildings every once in a while versus
architecture or architectural record or
any number of trade publications which
were you know splashy sunset images of
buildings a lot of advertisements and
this is of course the landscape has
changed now and we were sort of just on
online publications were just starting
to emerge that's a whole other
conversation but I think we we really
wanted to incorporate both of those
aspects right like and I should also say
that there was models like progressive
architecture had just recently folded
when we started but we were really drawn
journals more like that or even a lot of
European models like an el croquis or
there was we felt like there was a way
to to create there was a type of
architecture publication that didn't
exist in America which was both text and
image
and more importantly which featured our
projects in depth we were also really
inspired I should say by the kind of
what Denise Scott Brown talked about the
kind of little magazines or later when
Peter Eisenman was talking about
perspective he called the big little
magazines this idea of a magazine that's
kind of you know grassroots comes up
from kind of um often from the margins
is a little more polemical is a not
institutionally affiliated and over the
years we actually had a lot of offers to
become affiliated with institutions and
we really did we didn't do that because
we really valued the the independence i
should say practices totally
independently published and funded in um
it's really a bootstrap operation this
was a little template that i found from
the early days to that i think is
interesting just in terms of this notion
of editing writing designing is all of
the same ilk or at least for us we
approach it like we approached the
design of the magazine in the same way
that we approached design problems in
the architecture studio and so we
actually generated this early diagram
for how to conceptualize the journal you
know what would be the kind of main body
of it how would we by the way this
actually ended up not translating it all
into the journal nevertheless that idea
that this was this was only way we knew
how to approach it right this was how we
were thinking about a journal as a as a
design artifact and to get more to the
topic of writing i think i was looking
through and thinking about these 15
issues and from the beginning something
that was very important to us was to
feature architectural projects and also
architects writing about those buildings
and then critics kind of as a triad
those three things so architects writing
critics writings and then the projects
themselves we as part of that we were
very interested in questions rather than
declarations and we actually began the
journal with a series of this is the
first editorial and we very deliberately
set up a first years of five questions
sort of as a with a nod to look of aziz
five points so we had five questions we
weren't making arguments or points or
even it wasn't a kind of manifesto
sensibility was orillia in corry
sensibility and then over the years in
the journal we've actually included it i
never noticed this until i was preparing
for today that we asked a lot of
questions and actually the form of the
interview became a default for us partly
because architects tell you they don't
have any time to write something so it's
an easy way to get a kind of argument
out of an architect but I think it's
also it fits with the way we are
approach is that we liked this idea of a
kind of question based so this is an
article that we had early on in that
same first issue or bernard tschumi we
interviewed him about this project and
about his practice in general we also
this is a little bit later where we went
back and we interviewed REM koolhaas
bernard tschumi about we were this is an
issue on program and we saw both of them
as important figures in the kind of
rethinking of program particularly 70s
and 80s and so we asked them both the
same question and then feature their
answer side by side along with the
timeline of their projects that were
relevant to those questions we also try
whenever we can to we the pairing of
architectural work and architects
writings i think is an important pairing
and in this case this is an example from
an issue we did on technology where we
had an architect named Marco Thor
pisiform called decoy and we are
featuring his work at this and very
deliberately trying to pair that
literally on the same page thinking
about what images what projects are kind
of aligning with the statements and
comes that he's making in this interview
so that juxtaposition has always been
really important they wouldn't talk more
about how one thinks about that
relationship between those two literally
in the space of a valet out this is just
more of that same interview in his work
in that same issue we also featured on
Sheila Kennedy's work who's an architect
at MIT and who also hear there's an
interview you know one thing I just
think it's worth saying and maybe we can
talk about later is the question of
often we encounter this notion that
architects can't write right and I was
thinking about this is I think about the
interview was it was that did we do
interviews because architects can't
actually they can't write and I don't
think that's true but I think it's
something worth thinking about you know
so many the Arctic's that we admired you
know people like bernard tschumi people
like early cool house people like
eisenmann or greg lynn like all those
architects
were right that it was their written
projects that we admired as much as
their architecture itself and so I think
that's something that was really
important to us to allow the space for
architects to articulate their ideas and
words as well as in designs but I'll
just sort that out there i think is a
bias that still exists in architecture
or a presumption that architects because
they're skilled and one aspect which is
there they're you know they're skilled
as designers they may be are not skilled
as writers I think we have not found
that to be true and we also have done a
lot of work with them as a forum as an
interesting exploration for us in
responsive texts where we have in this
case it was a we had a series of
artificial critics responding to how
phosphor had just produced a text call
designing crime and it was there was a
kind of a lot of buzz about it so we had
different critics talk about his text
how faster is pissed at us to this day
by the way because he really did not
like what these people had to say about
his text we also had then had to give
him space to respond it would be much
easier if it was a blog but this is
pretty blog so no think it's a print
there was nothing since they only come
out every two years that's kind of a
challenge but nevertheless I think this
this also this idea of multiple voices
is also really important part for us I
think of what writing and architecture
means allowing different vantage points
on a given issue sorry let's give this
is and this is um this is a
questionnaire we did four different
curators we did an issue on curation and
we had different architecture curators
talking about how they conceptualize
duration I just thought I would put one
more issue for me anyway I wanted to go
all together if I go backwards um we did
an issue a few years ago that is it I
also became very self-conscious that
we've become much more text heavy
actually as we've gotten more mature and
this was an issue that um we had 11
architects interview each other so we
did a kind of round robin where we start
we were always present and asking
questions too but this notion that they
would ask questions of one another so
we had and that the design of the
journal was actually split so that you
would have these these parallel
interviews running so you'd have the
living interviewing Haller Yoon and then
the next one hell are you and would
interview someone else and then they
would kind of run I'm tracking across
each other horizontally on the page
these are some of those examples of
those interviews and I think this was
also a powerful way to think about how
architects express their ideas in
writing um I did want to just so one of
the things that was sort of suggested in
the questions and I just wanted to touch
on and have a clock up here so I've no
idea how much time I've shaken but um I
just want i want to touch on two more
issues the first one is why print and I
think this is an interesting question
today it was a question that we were
asked someone we first started in 1999
there certainly were starting to be
online publications nowhere near the the
depth of breath that we have today but I
think it's still a valid question what
is the role of the artifact itself and
that's something that's always been
incredibly important to us and I think
it's also because we because we
conceptualize it as a design project
this is my office at home and I put this
up just to also talk about the
challenges of you know it practices slow
but it's also heavy and it's like you
know it's carting it around as a pain
that's really expensive to ship the
issues I mean we don't even make any
money by the time we send it to someone
in Europe it's like I think we lose
money actually for what we cause so but
this idea of the thingness of praxis has
its drawbacks but it also i think for us
that is really the joy in the love of
the artifact and this is where I think
as designers editing right that's our
joy in making these issues often emerges
and I'll just take you through a few
examples of how we approach the art
design of the artifact itself so we work
with them someone a Ronald right out I
don't know what's happening with this
slideshow but has a mind of its own huh
so there's all those slides and so happy
we it's funny it'll go backwards one by
one but when it goes forwards it
progresses anyway we we've designed a
series of covers over the years that for
us the covers themselves have to
articulate the thematic in a way that we
feel like the projects that we're
including are doing as well so in other
words it's not just an image of a
project inside but how do we
conceptualize the design of the magazine
in the same way that these architects
are conceptualizing the theme so this is
an example we were looking at surface
the question of surface and we did an
in-depth study of her sucking dem Ron's
new deyoung museum out in San Francisco
which you may know that facade it has a
kind of metal Dippold perforated facade
that was actually based on an image that
they had found of a kind of light coming
that down through the trees and they
live at his pics later the image it and
then created the kind of perforation
pattern so we thought well how could we
translate that actually into the cover
of the journal so at great cost and
headache we actually made this early
kind of a laser-cut pixelated image
showed there be a kind of
semi-translucent idea that then you
would have a kind of hint of the issue
behind and sorry about the cheesy filter
of their arm on PowerPoint similarly
with the um I'll go back to this is our
issue on technology where this was a at
a moment where there was this was two
thousand and six or so and there was a
thermochromic ink which is an ink that
changes property in this case when it's
heated it becomes trans parents more or
less so in the same way that we were
looking at architects that were rican
sexualizing technologies what would be
the technology of printing that we could
think through in terms of the issue
itself so we printed an image with
thermochromic ink and actually hid the
table of contents behind so you can see
the table of contents is behind this
image we didn't print it anywhere else
in the journal so you had to when they'd
using the whole the journal in the heat
of your hand now it's going to go fast
just warn you because when I go forward
it doesn't the heat of your hand would
make that the this by the way I think
this was in a sauna or something I don't
know that was a really warm rooms of it
and the problem with thermochromic ink
is it doesn't actually work at
also you could no longer access the
table with others so this journal
because you give him nevertheless that
was another example I think of us just
trying to conceptualize the cover and a
final when I do want to show you issue 4
which is where we looking at landscapes
and we were considering the cover itself
as a kind of landscape landscape as a
thinkin condition thinking about surface
layers layers of landscape and so we
actually used them isn't technology of
like when you get a new credit card and
there's the bike young name it's like an
electromagnetic kind of scent but it's
not sticky but it actually so it's a
plastic-like film that was attached to
the cover we get calls all the time
people like my car broke we're like no
it's supposed to do that so that you
peel away the ideas that you would peel
away this kind of outer layer this is we
feature dillard skip videos blur
building inside and so we had a kind of
abstract version of that with words from
the table of contents so actually
telescoping through so as you peeled
away you would see these words and then
as you moved into the body of the
journal those words were actually taken
from the table of contents so we just
want to end by a question of the end and
this is a kind of moment in which we're
actually thinking about what does it
mean to have been publishing this for 15
years what is the landscape of
architecture publications today how do
we fit where should we fit and we've
actually just putting out a call for a
final issue so or at least we're or it
might turn into something else I don't I
don't know but it feels like you know
practices it costs us $25,000 to print
each issue and increasingly we're
finding that I think it is a moment to
question what is the role you know it
back to this little magazine model right
our little are these magazines meant to
be kind of ephemeral and occupy a kind
of certain moment in time and has that
moment passed and so I feel like I'm on
a therapy couch here now but
nevertheless I think this for me this is
maybe part of this conversation about
writing and building and these types of
journals how do they participate in
architectural discourse in and is there
a natural is there a kind of suggestion
of a finite time period so I welcome
thoughts about that too but um
thank you I've really enjoyed this
opportunity to present some of these
ideas and i look forward to conversation
Thank You Amanda don't go over the edge
so brian wallace is our next speaker and
brian is a renowned curator and
historian of photography but he's here
today to talk about blasted allegories
which is a book of artists writings that
he edited way back in nineteen eighty
seven think but which I would say is
still the Bible of contemporary artists
writings today so we're really excited
to hear where it stands for you these
days thank you very good I just want to
echo Amanda's remarks about this program
which i think is really exciting and as
Jen pointed out I think it's coming at a
propitious time because there is
tremendous interest in not just artists
but architects everybody has access to a
platform to write and publish now not
just online but all of the small
publications artists books anybody can
do it cheaply and easily now and as Jen
was mentioning if you go to the artist
Book Fair at ps1 every year it's just
thousands of artists small publishers
and so there's this incredible
proliferation of activity now in this
intersection between you know what used
to be very separate realms of art and
writing so I'm happy to come here and
talk about it's really one of my
favorite topics great panels here I
started out working with artists books
so it's
tremendously exciting to made to to see
this revival so many years later I don't
have any slides I wish I had had a man
to design some for me but I'm really
more on the on the writer side and
sometimes the pictures tend to overwhelm
what's really important to me which is
that intersection and interpenetration
of art ideas and visual images on but
really what I'm here for is to dust off
blasted allegories a
twenty-five-year-old volume that set up
out a long time ago to document what was
at that point real intense intersection
of art making and critical writing in
early 1980s it was really a genuine
movement at the time it was very clear
to discern the boundaries on the issues
that were involved so i think i think it
was sort of easier then it might appear
to have compiled this reader because you
know these people knew one another and
so on so what i'm going to do just very
briefly is sketch out some of the
history and animating principles behind
this book and to briefly suggest some of
the ways that i think the ideas and the
impetus behind the book remain relevant
today where our newly relevant today
maybe and certainly I look forward to
having conversation about the general
ideas or the specifics of how something
like this comes about um so it so
happens I was a very young guy and
blasted allegories was published in 1988
as the
critical anthology of writings produced
by the new Museum of Contemporary Art in
New York I was commissioned by new
museum director and founder Marsha
Tucker to compile an anthology of
artists statements and at that time what
that meant was those writings that
artists would do little paragraph or
something that would be published in
catalog and I think Marsha Tucker's idea
was like a little paragraph statement
juxtaposed with a picture of like the
real art and you know it is interesting
what why we think that artists don't
write or writers don't make our door why
there isn't more intermedia association
and collaboration and in fact there is
but particularly at that time in the
1980s there was very much a formal
routine where you had to separate those
practices and the artists writings or
statements were very much regarded as a
supplement to the art which was the real
thing so I had a different idea I sought
to engage what I saw around me as a very
lively intersection of textual writing
criticism and image making that really
was thoroughly interdependent not only
were the people all associating with one
another reading the same thing seeing
the same things talking about the same
things but the products that they
produced were actually intermingled so
you'd have montage text overlaid on
images or you'd have publications that
had a wild array of images and writings
and so forth by again a wide range of
people
you know filmmakers dancers artists
photographers critics theorists you know
all those things in an incredibly
diverse range of publications small
magazines like practice and that time
many others that were published in the
same way like a shoestring with grants
for me any a at that point artists books
artworks themselves and sometimes
interventions in larger publications I
myself published a small magazine called
wedge and other artists and critics did
the same writers such as Kathy Acker and
Lynne Tillman were collaborating with
visual artists artists such as anterin
and Richard prints were compiling their
own collections of literary writings so
there was a lot going on at the time and
there was no mistaking the fact that
this was really a movement and a
practice that was changing what were
previously discrete forms as I said
there were numerous texts it
incorporated images and artworks that
incorporated words in here you might
think of for example Barbara Kruger that
kind of thing but many many others doing
that kind of thing and it seemed to me
at that time that virtually every artist
I knew was also a writer unless the
writers were also producing some form of
art making or at least they were all
going to the same openings blasted
allegories forthrightly focused on New
York artists and writers that was the
audience I knew and I didn't see a
problem in restricting it that way and
the downtown writers and artists or was
they were
then postmodernists were pretty easy to
identify and the authors included in
this book I think there are about 40
authors but among them Laurie Anderson
Jenny Holzer Gary Indiana eric bogosian
john baldessari barbara kruger bruce
nauman Richard Prince Spalding Gray
David 10 Ravitch Carrie Mae Williams and
sherrie levine you get the idea all big
names now but not so then the book was
designed by bethany johns now a big name
here at RISD and the images were
selected and designed by barbara bloom
and Jill Perez the stated intention of
these contributors was to deconstruct
the methodologies of then entrenched
modernism part of which was the
separation into discrete artistic
practices and fields but it was not only
the aesthetic predilections but also the
politics and ideology of modernism that
was under attack by all these artists
sometimes in ways that is not evident on
this was after all the 1980s Ronald
Reagan was president there was an
illegal war being waged in Central
America AIDS was decimating the cultural
community and the internet hadn't even
been invented yet it was a bleak time
and I think these artists and writers in
their own modest ways we're trying to
address and change the unbearable
everyday conditions that surrounded them
so in addition to abolishing the
distinction between fiction writers and
artists blastn allegories also
highlighted a variety of writerly forms
and approaches some of which were quite
novel and unexpected but all united by
ideas that circulated regardless of
profession or stylistic approach as I
stated in the introduction to the book
for the writers in this book these
such as interviews monologues jokes
dream narratives parables etc oppose the
impose the imposed narrative structure
the unquestioned hierarchy of characters
in the easy closure of much conventional
modernist literature in place of
traditional expository writing or even
experimental texts the works collected
in blasted allegories posit a wholly
different approach to textual production
which challenges accepted sites
structures and meanings of discourse
listen sounds so 80s in place of
aesthetic innovation these writers
employ appropriation and Riaan scription
of existing voices styles and genres in
place of the coherence of the
conventional text they favor a form
which is fragmentary includes
inconclusive digressive and
interpenetrated with other texts in
place of the omnipresent author they
acknowledge a collectivity of voices and
active participation of the reader in
place of the new or the original they
accept an understanding of language and
stories as already written and shaped by
social and political conditions so
perhaps a bit overstated but you get the
idea focus less on formalistic stylistic
or literary issues than on the
theoretical and critical systems of
thought underlying them in shaping
social behaviors and representations
this postmodern generation of artists
use texts and images to raise issues
having to do with authorship and
subjectivity appropriation and property
identity and race gender and community
institutional critique and the archive
and media and public space the use of
appropriation and montage for example
allowed contemporary artists to create
fictionalized narratives
that pose fundamental questions about
the representations of the self in
society and in history about the shaping
effects of social stereotypes in the
mass media and about the relationship
between images and truth or authenticity
and while appropriation for example
endorse the radical D contextualisation
of images from their original sites on
the other hand it opened a space to
establish new meanings and to challenge
viewers to reconstruct the terms of its
original use my thesis was that all
these critical writings were inherently
political challenging not only specific
ideas and policies but also
conventionalized ways of thinking and
shaping social ideas the art and writing
could take many forms but what United
them were the critical ideas shaped in
part by newly available European
theories about representation and
cultural production by by roland part
jean-fran√ßois lyotard michel foucault
jean baudrillard and jacques derrida in
my case I was influenced by the American
critic Craig Owens who argued that these
texts enacted their political critiques
allegorically hence the title blasted
eligor ease in other words whatever the
nominal subject matter whether personal
or public a larger meaning could be
derived from or read through the text
allegory is simply the rhetorical device
that escribes hidden meanings to
symbolic figures in a text or image well
for many authors in the early 1980s this
was deliberate intentionality was not
necessary for the function of allegory
in these written pieces the 21st century
realities of new technologies and
globalization have radically transformed
the applications of writing and imagery
the ways they're produced and circulated
and appropriated and trends
formed the Internet has obviously
created an extraordinary space of
exchange interaction but it is also
empowered to design ordering and
transformation of images in bold new
ways access and simultaneous
simultaneity have dramatically reshaped
and reconstituted the social and
political landscape a new generation of
artists writers that includes just to
name a few Walid Rudd I way way Emily
jaseera ketose Terrell Thomas Hirschhorn
Robin ray Maura Davy employ mimicry and
gesture narrative and history fiction
and documentary and repetition and
difference to visualize individual and
collective expression as well as
convulsive social transformations in a
global context they engage very
different issues reconsideration of
information ordering and the archive new
issues of the politics of exile
displacement and hybridity they use
fiction to challenge documentary fact
and create a subjective reshaping of
history and memory and finally they
validate wonder speculation and
traumatic reconstitution of the written
and the visual these are new approaches
some were hinted at or explored in
blasted Ella gory especially as its text
examined gender nationality sexual
identity and racial histories as told
through the archive the ruin the
fragment and the trace thank you
thank you Brian mm-hmm so our next
speaker is Marissa ma's ria cats she is
a journalist who has reported from all
over the world and is here today to talk
about creative time reports of which she
is editor it's a two-year-old public
three-year-old online publication that
features artists voices from around the
world on the critical issues of our
times thanks let me get you set up here
okay Dave we're ready great thank you
thanks so much for having me here today
um how many of you know creative time
show hands great so for those of you who
don't know I'm sure you've seen some of
our projects before but you didn't know
that there were ours so tribute and
light this incredible project was
actually inaugurated six months after
nine eleven by our former artistic
director and Pasternak and has since
nine eleven been shining on the city
every year during the anniversary
waiting for godot in New Orleans this is
an amazing project that I think is
really important to talk about just
because it helps to sort of lay the
foundation as to why creative time
reports exists so artist Paul Chan
staged the play Waiting for Godot in the
middle of an intersection in New Orleans
9a Lower Ninth Ward the idea came about
after Paul visited New Orleans
post-hurricane Katrina and while he was
there he was struck by a disturbing
quiet there were no hammer sounds there
were no construction crews and there
were no cranes swinging on the skyline
his immediate response was to imagine an
outdoor performance of Samuel Beckett's
play Waiting for Godot and when asked
about the inspiration for the project
chan explained there is a terrible
symmetry between the reality of New
Orleans post-katrina and the essence of
this play which expresses in stark
eloquence the cruel and funny things
people do while they wait for help for
food for tomorrow this is another one
that is an incredible project it took
place in 1989 it was grand Furies
kissing doesn't kill greed and
indifference do and this project took
place during the height of the AIDS
crisis in the United State
and it was a political art action that
appropriated advertising and media
strategies to spread information about
AIDS and its social ramifications to a
vast audience by pairing the pieces
message with the image of three
interracial couples both same-sex and
heterosexual kissing the image appeared
on postcards and on the sides of buses
in New York City now it's it's kind of
interesting to talk about a project like
this today because you know were
constantly flooded with images and their
endless opportunities for us to share
how we feel on media social media
channels constantly but you know at the
time this piece was extremely powerful
in its ability to get across to large
audiences the urgency of the AIDS
epidemic while the government was
sitting by and doing nothing and i'm not
sure if a lot of you might have seen
last year's four-story high-sugar Sphinx
from artist Kara Walker in the abandoned
sugar factory this was you know a
project that exceeded our expectations
it was it was incredible to see the
crowds that were coming and it was
incredible to work with an artist like
Kara Walker I'm and I think it's really
important to mention what she called the
piece you know it was called a subtle
tea but then then the full title was an
homage to the unpaid and overworked
artisans who have refined our sweet
tastes from the cane fields to the
kitchens of the new world it's projects
like these that underscore the
organization's mission that artists are
important to society that artists should
be weighing in on the times in which we
live and that public spaces are places
for free expression and creativity so
roughly five years ago creative time
started to imagine other places to
insert artists voices and there were a
lot of questions that were poor well
that were put forth and some of these
questions were put forth actually before
I even came on because actually it's my
four year anniversary last week but some
of these questions were you know if
create
time believes that artists matter in
society and if we want them to impact
how we think about today's most pressing
issues what are the public spaces that
would truly magnify their voices where
should they be participating and where
is public dialogue happening and and I
think the the final question was really
like how kalkan artists deepen and also
bring a sense of candor back to public
discourse and you know it took a while
but basically we kind of came to the to
the conclusion that this was the answer
was online and and it took a year of
incubation before creative time reports
was born but in the year leading up to
the launch of creative time reports we
used that time when we weren't actually
published anything to really establish
several pillars on which the site would
always rest first we would work with
artists located all over the world so
this was really the exciting part of the
job because and I had already been doing
so much of this as a journalist you know
I was actually rarely home for more than
two weeks at any given moment but this
this time this was a such a different
way of seeing the cities that I had
traveled to and we started by you know I
visited Tunisia hungry the United Arab
Emirates and Kenya and this was all
before we launched not only to meet
potential contributors but also to gauge
you know what does it mean to have a
project where artists are weighing in on
the news where artists are reporting on
the world in which they live what what
is that you know it is that is that
going to be meaningful for you is that
going to be safe for you and you know it
was it was really interesting each
country kind of helped me understand the
things that we needed to bring to the
site so there were the early suspicions
were that you know of course a
monolithic approach to the Commission's
we're never going to work right that the
pieces we featured had to be as
wide-ranging inform subject and language
as the contributors were diverse so this
meant for us you know you might go onto
our site you might see
you'll see a variety of languages and we
always privilege the artists native
language before english and i can talk a
little bit more about that you know
maybe at the QA but that was really in
hopes that the pieces that we we
published weren't just for you know the
american audiences but in fact that in
the respective countries that people
would read it and be able to engage with
it as well it also meant cultivating a
deep sense deep sensitivity to the
geopolitical situations that have the
potential to make our artists vulnerable
so and this has happened a couple in a
couple of instances for us actually that
an artist is asked to remain anonymous
and we absolutely agreed to hide his or
her identity so we also felt that one of
the key components of this project was
staying abreast of foreseeable potential
for life-altering consequences like the
2013 Kenny elections and and that that's
actually why I traveled to Kenya was to
get a sense I knew this was going to be
a very big story in 2013 and I wanted to
meet people who were going to talk to me
about 2007 which was you know the year
that violence resulted in in over a
thousand deaths after the last elections
and I wanted to see what you know what
were artists talking about what was
important and what were their potential
fears for the upcoming 2013 election so
this is one story that we did with an
artist I met in Nairobi named anquetil
oh my you and it's a piece called Kenya
elections whispers of Hope fears and
fear and hope and she's an incredible
artist that we've actually worked with
on three occasions she's covered travels
through the rift valley in Kenya and
she's also done a piece for us very
recently about Somali Kenyans and their
lives in in Kenya at the moment um the
other piece that was something that we
we were thinking about you know long in
advance was the American the withdrawal
of American troops from Afghanistan and
what could potentially happen when they
left you know so when we look at the
when we look at at the calendar when
were
thinking about what's going to happen
how do we want a commission we're
constantly thinking news news news
what's going to be in the news how do we
keep up with the news all of these
things and I'll kind of go into that a
little bit more because that could be
totally terrifying and when you're a
team of two but okay the the other thing
is that so in order to sort of make sure
that we were relevant and part of what
the news media sites were talking about
we were going to talk about evergreen
issues things that we knew for sure
would be interesting to people and that
was issues like global warming and race
surveillance or immigration and and each
time we identified these salient issues
in advance and we'd ask ourselves you
know who are the artists that are most
poised to respond and what we were
looking for were artists that howard
zinn described in his book artists in
time times of war who could think
outside the boundaries of permissible
thought and dare to say things that no
one else will say finally and this is
this is kind of a little bit where I
come in a critical component was to try
to cultivate major publication
partnerships right so that these
publications would then Co publish our
pieces and thereby distribute personal
perspectives and critical interventions
to thousands or even millions of readers
right because as a team of two within
even an organization whose primary you
know focus is creating public programs
you know how do we get our message out
there and we really felt that the way we
can do it is to work with other
publications so so now we're kind of
like right before we launched you know
where we knew what we wanted to
Commission and we were but we were still
determining you know exactly what these
pieces would look like and and I wanted
to stop for once I can just say a little
bit about me and how I think it probably
affected the overall style and direction
of the site I have no art history
background I
she'd film and then I moved to the
middle east i got a master's in Middle
East history and while I was there I
started writing for publications and but
the thing was I started to kind of
initially felt like culture was really
where I felt my heart was like these are
the stories I wanted to tell so I was
covering the boom of museums in the Gulf
or I was speaking with artists in exile
or I was you know covering for instance
in Afghanistan five-thousand-year-old
archaeological sites that were under the
threat of war and I was working in
Morocco to talking about television
stars and how they were communicating
and working on centuries-old traditions
of reconciliation to heal deep wounds
within the community so each of my
stories were talking politics but they
were never really head-on and and by the
time creative timer had contacted me to
start this project I was splitting my
time between New York and Morocco where
I was teaching teenagers and who lived
in some of the worst slums and Morocco
had a blog so all of this is to say that
ok I had a lot of exposure to artists
but it was really something entirely
different to remove the middleman me and
and Commission these pieces where we
heard directly from artists around
issues in the news and you know they're
all these questions like that that the
artists were asking us that we were
asking ourselves where our artists
reporters should we hold them up to the
same rules that we would for a
journalist what section of a newspaper
with these people that with these pieces
that we co-published be and you know and
there were you know there were several
stories that helped shape the direction
of the site this is our current home
page right now and but I wanted to talk
about one in particular that really
helped me to kind of expand what this
project had to be and what it could be
and and this was an artist who came to
us and wanted to do a very touching
portrait of a country undergoing
recession and when we were editing the
piece i asked the artist for more
details you know about a particular
passage I think I wanted more of a
description of
the person that they were quoting and
and they came back to me they said you
know are we using a new york time style
of objectivity in fact checking because
actually I'd rather not work that way so
I so I was like okay you know all right
that that's really eye-opening and okay
I have to embrace this and I can't come
I have this kind of news brain but I
have to we have to widen the way that
we're going to work we have to we have
to accommodate a myriad of ways that
artists are going to approach their
pieces and and this sometimes meant
accepting push back when we asked for a
more linear way of writing fact-based
but it also meant that when an artist
wanted to create a piece for a major
publication like the guardian which is
our our main partner we could help usher
in an article that would meet the
demands of the artist first and foremost
of course and then we can also make sure
that the outlet that we were working
with it was really satisfied right that
that we were turning in a piece that
they felt they could run so regardless
of all this though you know the project
first and foremost is about privileges
of artists and we had to find ways to
make sure that the people who were
reading our pieces were aware that who
you're reading was not your typical
pundits but people who have spent years
thinking and working in ways that are
vastly different than any reporter um
whenever we did work with a media
partner we were always hoping to find an
angle the news would be interested in
but our take would be entirely different
than any of the submissions they would
normally get on the subject and you can
see this in our very first partnership
this was with foreign policy magazine
based in Washington DC on the occasion
of the Hajj the annual pilgrimage to
Mecca undertaken by Muslims as one of
the five pillars of Islam and the photo
essay was by an incredible Saudi artist
named Ahmed mater and he has been
working he's had he's had the privilege
of working in Mecca with permission from
the actual governor of Mecca who has
allowed him to document the rapidly
transforming sacred city which is
flooded with multi-million dollar real
estate
so these are just a couple of the images
of off meds you could see the cranes in
the center there is the Kaaba and very
vague vaguely you can sort of discern
the people walking around it this is a
hotel room which is fascinating it's a
hotel that was recently a built that is
often purchased or for year round by
companies that so it's often empty
actually but it's very it's a kind of an
exclusive room and it overlooks the
Kaaba and you and so he was he actually
snuck in and he took this image and and
it kind of it sort of talked a lot about
what was happening in the city and this
is this is an image that he took on his
way home he liked the the way that the
the gasoline was being kind of light lit
up so what I just wanted to show you
that this is what foreign policy did you
know recently in a piece where they
could they cover the hush okay so it's
very straightforward and it's dramatic
but it kind of lacks that it it doesn't
have the same sort of take on what's
happening in Mecca during that time of
year as off meds peace and and so I
think that's an important kind of
distinction to show you know that the
kinds of pieces that we were providing
to these publications and and it's
really interesting to and we can talk
about this at during the Q&A but the
feedback from a lot of the these
publications were they were just eager
eager to meet and hear of new people to
report on these issues instead of going
straight to the wires right to AP to get
e like they love this idea that there
were just the people that had never
heard of right and um you know I I think
that that also sort of connects a little
bit to a a piece that kind of sort of
changed creative time reports and in
many ways I mean it was our it was our
first big piece that would that came out
was with the Guardian it was a piece by
David Byrne on the
effects of soaring rents in New York
City and I don't know if you if you've
read it I mean one of the things about
about this idea of giving your pieces to
publications you you really don't like
often know that we we actually
commissioned it and worked on it and
just give it they've given it to them so
but that's okay I mean the point is
really about inserting these artists
voices into the into major media anyway
I just I just this piece was incredible
and I just want to read very quick
passage from the piece and that I just
love and I think really really
articulates what he was going after some
folks believe that hardship breeds
artistic creativity I don't buy it one
can put up with poverty for a while when
one is young but it will inevitably
where a person down I don't romanticize
the bad old days I find the drop in
crime over the last couple of decades
refreshing I have no illusions that
there was a connection between that City
on its knees and a flourishing of
creativity I don't believe that crime
danger in poverty make for good art
that's but i also don't believe
that the drop in crime means the city
has to be more exclusively for those who
have money increases in the quality of
life should be for all not just for a
few so since our first partnership with
foreign policy we've worked with a dozen
of public dozen publications including
this one is a piece we did out with al
jazeera america and this is another one
that we did with the photographer sylvia
play key and The New Yorker I'm going to
take you very quickly through Trevor pag
lens project which actually transformed
the way we publish we flew over the NSA
the National Reconnaissance Office and
the national geospatial-intelligence
agency at night this was not an easy
feat we especially because the ng eia
was in a flight restricted zone but we
flew over it and we got these images and
what Trevor did which was really
incredible as he made all of the images
from the shoot available in the public
domain and we partnered with this piece
with the intercept which has founded by
Laura Poitras Glenn Greenwald and Jeremy
Scahill and the piece basically was all
of these images which anybody can
download and anybody can use and it
launched with the intercept on the day
that it that the site actually debuted
the piece was picked up and covered by
all of these different publications and
it continues to be for instance it was
on the cover of a Human Rights Watch
report tom engelhardt book you can see
here shadow government you can find this
image all over the all over the place
whenever talking about the NSA and what
what you know what was really important
to Trevor is that there's just not many
images of these intelligence agencies
available and how do we get them out
there how do we show people what these
buildings look like we're all this money
is going to so you know that the the
final thing I just want to talk about is
that this project really took a lot of
time and energy to create and as a
result of that are thinking we decided
to slow down and we found ourselves in
essence kind of lining up a little bit
with the way that creative time works
right and and that meant ensuring that
our artists are grounded in the
communities that they cover to avoid the
ubiquitous art world and media world in
general pitfall of parachuting in to
report on the crisis and leaving before
any substantive work has been done and
the slower pace actually it essentially
allows us to work with more integrity to
fact-check all the more rigorously and
to take time to massage the ideas that
are still being formed and
simultaneously it's allowed us to
cultivate new paths for outreach you
know we have now a set of regional
editors that are based everywhere from
Istanbul to Nairobi to Vancouver and
these editors are seen as our eyes and
ears on the ground and they help us to
deepen our sensitivity to local
conditions and I just will end it with
just this week we call publish the piece
with an incredible poet named Alec
vigman on whose part of the duo dark
matter and the peace talks about the
current moment of unprecedented
visibility for some transgender
celebrities but individuals who are
gender and on
conforming still face harassment
hostility and fear and the peace the
peace actually went viral and this
morning I checked it was at 23,000
shares it was what we we did with the
Guardian and this is a lot more of the
direction that we're sort of heading
into is really making sure that a lot of
the pieces we create arm find a home in
a partner publication and I'll just to
say you know to wrap it up that you know
we strive to present artists engaging
with pressing issues in an expanded
range of forms punctuating news feeds
and home pages around the world with
unexpected stories and images and you
know we hope that our signature mix of
art activism and journalism will become
an increasingly visible and trusted
source for unconventional forms of
expression with real political impact
thank you
thank you very much do we owe there's
Amanda thank you all very much Amanda
and Brian and and Marissa it doesn't
sound like you're slowing down at all
worse but I love that idea so we have I
didn't check my clock but I'm sure we
have some time for questions 215 so do
would you mind being the other
microphone person so uh yeah Dave could
you bring up the lights a little bit
thank you great yes so so many
perspectives and probably so many
questions who would like to start us out
well this is very stimulating it made me
think of what Nikki said before his
tongue was cut out he said every artist
should have his tongue cut out but it's
good he hadn't had it cut out before he
made that utterance you know I i think
it was Brian who's talking about
Smithson and the writings of that period
you may have known the name Peter
hutchinson he he told me he writing
articles for art for Martin American
places like that and he went to a party
in New York and someone said Peter
hutchinson oh you're the writer and so
he stopped writing but this this is so
interesting about the need for artists
to become articulate these days and I I
wrote a piece this year about expert
expertise and the articulate artists
thinking the word expertise as you
probably know as a Greek word and it
means when the mute image speaks out and
becomes articulate and so the urge to
combine language with image is its
ancient really they put the poems on
coins in order to say something
but with the internet so such great
great changes are happening with the
hyperlinks and with the new mediums
WordPress and places like that that I do
think that and that's what i learned
from praxis was the ways to assimilate
or suggest the various layering in a
print form it's quite fascinating so I
want to make those remarks thank you
in the journal
hi I have a numerator
Oh
I've never thought of it in those terms
I thought your thing about conceptually
enter the argument exceptionally enter
the but don't you're right and I think
that reinforces the point that I was
making about the the entanglement of our
identities as architects and s designers
and maybe I think all of us are getting
at this question in different ways to
and notion of pairing of text and image
and of the desire to be articulate
within the context of a design practice
and I think because we see the design of
the artifact as analogous or similar to
the way we approach design problems in
it so in that way you're right it is a
kind of entrance we didn't use that
specifically architectural term when we
thought of it but that's exactly what it
is is the kind of entrance to the but
also conceptually it was a the notion of
thinking of the cover as a kind of
design exercise also just so that it
would it would inhabit the same ideas
about the issue thematic that the
architects were also challenging that we
were we were interested in art tasting
this issue in here that we were making
our own kind of design approach to that
issue too but i will say that is also
what makes the issue challenging and
which is maybe leading to our ultimate
and here is them the this question of
cost i think is is it may be part of
this too and one thing that struck me in
your conversation was about creative
tentative so fascinating in this notion
also that you're not like this notion
that you have to give away the
recognition but also the incredible
resources of mistaken and funding to
support these people that are finding
these stories and right and then that
that how do you I mean that's an
incredibly generous intellectual
position right that you allow that
material into a kind of public domain
I'm moving off the topic a little here
that you brought up but for me that's an
interesting piece of all this too is who
where the resources come from
respond to that just a little bit I
think that really falls under what
creative time is I think it's we are a
public art organization and we felt like
we had to somehow translate that into
this project and yeah it does it does
hurt sometimes because people will talk
to you about pieces and they'll not have
any idea that you you were the one who
created it and Commission didn't have
the idea but you know but but it feels
good to to speak to people that would
never read or have anything to do with
the art world or artists and so I think
that's at the heart of what we're doing
it's interesting couple weeks ago we had
a visitor to our class named or eat gat
she's a writer on art and publishing and
the internet and she said something like
I don't want to miss paraphrase her but
that you know you might have lost faith
in for-profit publishing long ago if you
ever had it right and even nonprofit
publishing is sort of beholden to
certain interests and she was sort of
speculating that it's institutional
publishing it's interesting that you
said now I'm going to stay out of the
institution that institutions are the
places that might have the freedom right
now to experiment and to you know
broaden the bounds yeah well uh just one
more thing that which is I think
yeah fact I think one of the desires for
all of these writers and maybe for every
writer is to expand their audience right
and so this book or even practice you're
talking about a pretty small audience I
mean even limited by print Ron and their
physical accessibility but now through
social media and what social media has
spawned which is kind of partnerships
and demand for content that creative
time reports taps into you're suddenly
talking about exponentially larger
audiences with just untold magnitude and
so to me that's kind of the dream to
connect these really smart people people
who are thinking outside the box or in
unconventional ways with a much larger
audience through whatever means possible
I had a question for Marissa along the
notes of funding does it ever become a
commercial conflict for a creative time
reports with the publishers in terms of
advertising and do your partner's ever
try and cross sell your commission with
advertisers oh that's a really good
question they they tend to keep us out
of that discussion so if that has
happened I wouldn't know and where we
sit is in the op-ed section 2 and it in
most places and like for instance with
the Guardian but so yeah does that
answer your question I mean in terms of
we we really have this relationship with
the editors which is I wish it was a
little bit more extensive but the
reality is that these guys are churning
things out constantly
and I'm providing them with something
that's usually really clean you know
checked and and and if there are some
issues that they have with it I don't
often know you know whether they do or
not does that ever come up as an
opportunity that like when you're sort
of pitching a story too I mean like for
example i'm sure some creative time
projects are open to sponsorship could
there be an opportunity for a creator
time report that is launched just like a
larger feature in The Guardian that is
sort of cross promoted with brands and
advertising because I've become an
editorial problem or opportunity because
that started like a realistic
proposition to be made in terms of
funding this work right outside of just
creative time well I'll just talk a
little bit about our funding structure
that might be of interest we get general
Grant's you know the organization
creative time gets grants and then we
get specific grants for the project for
creative time reports we one of the
things I didn't talk about in in the
speech was that we actually never I mean
it's so rare that an artist will talk
about a project that they're that
they've worked on or or why they are so
for instance like if there's an artist
who's in who's done a project on sexual
harassment when they write a piece for
us we never actually have them reference
the project it has already assumed that
they are an expert and they are writing
about their experience and so projects
often don't make it into the project
into the piece itself and so we haven't
had that opportunity really it's been a
big separation in terms of in the
projects of creative time we we haven't
when we've covered the projects that
creative thomason so for instance we did
a series of five artists for the kara
walker project and also for our black
radical brooklyn project we did not co
publish those with a with
their publication simply because it
really is our own you know project and
we didn't you know we didn't see that
that doesn't fit in terms of the
partnership model we've created because
I hope that answers your question my
question is tired thank you so much for
speak I was wondering our curator in
much of your life it was wondering about
how you see sort of confluences and
differences between your territorial
practice in your editing practice
particularly regarding
does this work no that's a good question
and I think you know similar kinds of
changes have taken place in museums and
curatorial world that you could track
along the same lines as what's happened
to the breakdown of generic distinctions
between writing and art making and I've
always favored a more theatrical and
engaging form of exhibition making but
it doesn't always work and you know so I
I feel like exhibitions could be should
be much more experimental than they are
but you know it's like some rigid
formats are very conservative and hard
to change institutions are difficult to
change so you know I'm always looking
around at smaller institutions that have
the wherewithal or the freedom to create
experiments with the exhibition formats
similarly I'm always looking at smaller
publications that have the freedom to
experiment with writing formats or
publishing or editorial formats at the
same time this ties back to what I was
saying before you're always thinking
about what's the audience how can you
engage the audience both physically and
intellectually but also in terms of
drawing more people into the collection
of ideals that you're exploring and so
those
things are often in some sort of balance
like how experimental or radical can you
be in your practice while still
enlarging the circle of people we're
going to be willing to come with you on
a journey and explore the ideas and
answer your question okay um so my
question is to Marisa and it's mostly on
the politics behind selecting the
writers and the topics and the kind of
public debates that actually make it
into the creative time reports and if
that is at all compromised when you
start launching the pieces and two other
media outlets yeah that's a great
question um that's a really good
question i I'll tell I'll tell you a
little bit about our editorial practice
up in our process and how we work so I
would never look too I would never
compromise an artist point of view or
their piece if it meant that I
co-publishing so i would i would just
have it on creative time reports that's
like I said they're going to talk what's
most important is really the artists
voices and making sure that the artists
feel really really comfortable and and
not that we're editing or curtailing
things that they'd like to say so when I
do publish a piece with an artist a
political piece that we we what we do is
we get the piece we look at it and we
say does this feel like it could fit
into another publication we don't really
work the other way around it's really
like what I do is I think okay there is
an issue I know that there's going to be
an anniversary of something of like a
war that's going to happen and who is
the artist that's most poised to talk
about this who's the who's the artist
whose practice has focused on this issue
for so many years and then we reach out
we ask them if they're interested
and it's not always text you know
sometimes its images its films its
poetry and then based on what we get we
then work with the artist to see okay
well this will this be something that
you'd be interested in co-publishing I
mean we always ask that question first
and foremost and I think that's how we
make sure that the artist doesn't feel
compromised in any way the follow-up and
are there any stories for example that
you choose not to include in your
publication so like something that is
completely controversial a topic that's
completely controversial or like a
source of yeah like a kind of taboo
especially politically no I know I don't
know if you look at our site we've
pretty much we've done kind of almost
everything um I'll tell you that while
it's not taboo we don't really want to
hear the way it's not that we don't want
to hear we don't asked it about the art
world like we don't ask artists to write
about what's happening in the art world
we don't ask anybody to write about
shows we don't I mean that's really what
we kind of say no to I mean we've talked
about artists and wages and how how come
artists are asked to work for free these
things are important to us right but but
like in a seminal show and a review of
it or like what's happening at moma you
know not in not of interest so I'd say
that's really what we don't we don't
work with thank you okay thank you all
so much and thank you everyone for
participating in our first panel today
so we're going to take about a 15-minute
break and then reconvene here at 2 45
and and on to listening to our artists
and designer writers thank you
