so welcome if everybody could take our
seats we're going to get started so
welcome to the afternoon panel of
questing aesthetics the title of this
panel is art craft design cultural
artifacts and there have been two
questions posed to us is there any
distinction between or among them and
what are the implications for museums
and pedagogy my name is Sarah gansbaai
if I'm the deputy director of
exhibitions educational programs here at
the RISD museum and I can't think of a
more fitting context to take these
questions on after all we're in a place
that calls it a school of a design
however the museum is called a Museum of
Art and it contains objects from ancient
times to the present day that we like to
describe as art and design so within
it's very self we have these questions
of shifting meaning but to start the
conversation we have three wonderful
panelists I'm going to introduce them
briefly they're each going to give their
presentations I'll ask a few questions
everyone has lots of thoughts from this
morning so we'll have no end of
discussion but we also want to turn it
over to you to join in that conversation
so first we'll be joined by Julia Brian
Wilson who is the associate professor of
modern and contemporary art at the
University of California Berkeley then
Steve blue bar was a professor in the
departments of history American Studies
and history of art and architecture of
brown and finally ty Smith who's
assistant professor in the department of
art history visual culture and theory at
the University of British Columbia so
please join me in welcoming Julia Brian
Wilson thank you
thank you so much to Sarah and two
Yuriko and Michael for the invitation I
was part of an earlier iteration of this
conference at UC Berkeley that was
really stimulating and productive and
the morning this morning session that
goes some of the incredible energy and
momentum that I felt was already
starting to gather there so I'm really
honored to be part of this as some of
you know I taught at RISD from two
thousand four to two thousand seven so
it's specially nice to be back and see
so many familiar faces I've chosen to
talk about the questions of Arts is this
working no let's see the questions of
art craft design and cultural artifacts
through a really specific lens the lens
of my current research it's absolutely
work in progress and I really hope that
to get some feedback I'm having a little
AV trouble but I see that help is on its
way there we go it wouldn't really be an
art history ish conference without
technical problems so I feel like we've
just really great that starting off with
some blank screen starting in nineteen
seventy two artists Louise Nevelson made
a series of sculptures that she called
dream houses for these works she
utilized her most well-known artistic
process namely the accretion and
Assembly of small bits of wood into a
larger construction that has been
painted a unifying color usually black
as you see here but not always tall and
narrow with a series of small flaps and
doors that can be opened and shut using
cabinet hinges the dreamhouse structures
are permeable in several ways not only
because of their variously accessible or
closed entrances but also because their
walls are Riven with perforations and
openings which make the entire
enclosures shot through with passages of
light to create densely visual geometric
fields thick with protrusions and
cavities organic oblong shapes nest
within squares and neat circular cutouts
rest over rectangles making sliding
apertures with odd jagged pieces like
shards or fingers fitting together to
create the sense that one might fiddle
with some unexpected piece
the facade to reveal specially built
secret compartments the dream houses
thus conjure a sense of concealment like
dynamic or tricky rebuses at the same
time that they communicate a directness
and are forthright about their means of
making while they give the feeling of a
puzzle to be cracked they are not
mystifying in the sense that they do not
obscure or veil the labors that produce
them instead trespassing the line
between sculpture would handicraft
furniture and architecture in this more
boxy version the cobble together feel of
the others in the series gives way to a
highly stylized almost art deco design
with its curving lines and symmetrical
punched out circles that traverse the
works front and back in contrast to the
mouse sized external doors recesses and
cubbies that might hold a small object
in the previous work shown the entire
structure of this stream house opens
like a cabinet or armoire with a person
sized hollow inside segmented by two
shelves and people did go inside some of
them or rather at least one person did
for the purposes of posing for this
photograph witness here the artist
herself Nevison nevelson emerging from
yet another dream house and this picture
was taken in 1972 with her swathed in a
flamboyant tattered fur coat whose
contrasting striped pattern echoes the
abstraction and rigid containerization
of her sculptures house as female body
or interior as unconscious these widely
recognizable associations have famously
been plumbed by other sculptors such as
Louise Bourgeois along with the
surrealist influence demonstrated in
such work Nelson had become known by the
1970s for her promiscuous integration of
cubism and Expressionism but I'm
interested here today in her process
namely her stated investment in
carpentry not only is a literal means of
production but also as a way perhaps for
her to hammer out or make space for
different relations some of the works in
the series were built at a smaller
squatter more intimate scale such as
dream house to which measuring about
four feet by two feet by one foot could
comfortably fit on a large kitchen table
like a perplexing fine art doll house
with its array of external knobs and
bits of molding to be clear I do not
mean to belittle or denigrate this
series by comparing its scale to
household fixtures such as a wardrobe or
a table or even a toy for integral to
Neville sins work was her deep interest
in furniture in particular the way that
such objects can hold histories and
memories and the effective bonds we
Forge with the things that surround us
where we live the unique merging a flesh
and bone with material like upholstery
and wood that can happen when one sits
in a chair as both skin and fabric yield
to the weight her earliest known drawing
in fact which is on the left is of a
little girl leaning back on what looks
like a hard bench or settee her legs too
short to reach the ground under her the
child is charmingly naive and schematic
while the furniture is remarkably
detailed this and other archival
materials are from the Smithsonian
archive of American Art and though there
is no date provided it's obviously the
handiwork of a child one that
demonstrates a precocious interest in
and comprehension of interiors and
spatial relations later drawings like
the one on the right reveal a persistent
interest in the precise proportions and
specifics of period furniture the broken
apart components of which would become
in a few decades her sculpture calling
herself a builder and an architect of
shadows of light and dark Nevelson
revealed in a bending gendered
conventions about the proper techniques
for female artists as she scavenged her
materials from gutters and lumber yards
reusing scraps that were the evidence of
their previous lives including their
felicitous kuchh cuts and their damage
often cannibalizing previous sculptures
sometimes dismantling them completely in
harvesting their parts to produce new
pieces along with builder and architect
she most often referred to her practice
as carpentry signaling a downward class
identification with a skilled trade as a
way to distance herself from her origins
as one observer wrote she was not
interested in upper middle-class Jewish
life and of course this is a kind of
familiar bohemian disavowal but I do
also think that
this allegiance to carpentry in part
helped her announce a different set of
affiliations as psychic and material
environments the dream houses our spaces
for reinvention expansion and dwelling
as she recycled found objects and
architectural fragments like cornices
banisters bed posts doorknob styles and
spindles to create evocative quasi
domestic environments and those parts
those architectural or domestic
fragments often remain recognizable in
her sculptures Mendelson sculpture was
based on a process of salvaging
gathering and sorting procedures that
spilled over into her own home as her
living space and her workspace blurred
together in the 1960s after she got rid
of all of her possessions and lived
totally surrounded by her art materials
there's a famous series of photographs
in Life Magazine that shows that even
her bathtub is filled with wood scraps
of which would she would make into it
she had didn't have a couch she got rid
of everything that we associate sort of
with a comfortable interior everything
was devoted to the making of her art so
she renounced all matter not related to
her sculpture in pursuit of some
reconfigured relationship to things and
ownership in other words nevelson
cohabitated with many of her sculptures
producing an ever-changing domestic
landscape of her own creation and an
image from her 1967 Whitney exhibition
shows that her design sense for the
museum was no less teeming with material
what appear to be boxes and trays of
junk castoffs or garbage are made into
art in part by her process of organizing
these disparate pieces according to an
overriding visual logic units crucially
brought forcefully together as a single
optical field by her use of ever-present
black spray paint indeed Neville sins
embrace of blackness in my view is one
of the most radical aspects of her work
and she's really been seen I think as a
kind of ambassador for the color black
this is just one very paradigmatic
example of a portrait of her rendered in
two differing textures of black on a
catalog cover this blackness I suggest
is not only significant at the level
form as a unifying pigment but has other
implications as her monochromatic works
are also chart ask charged questions
about blackness not only as chromatic
pigment but also as a mutable
ever-shifting and possibly political
designation in many interviews and
writings over the course of her career
nevelson stated her profound attachment
to the color black so this is a quote
I'm about to resume when I fell in love
with black it contained all color it
wasn't the negation of color it was an
acceptance because black encompasses all
colors black is the most aristocratic
color of all the only aristocratic color
there is no color that will give you the
feeling of totality of piece of
greatness of quietness of excitement I
will only draw your attention to a few
crucial phrases here one is the idea of
black not as a negation but an
affirmation or positive gathering
together a totality the other is the
idea of black as the only aristocratic
color there's an obvious class aspect to
this as she infuses the color with a
sense of grandeur Neville sins blackness
then for her was the color of peace
greatness quietness and excitement
appointed rejoinder to those who
understood it as denigrate as degenerate
or lesser than and I will say that this
quote was importantly published in
nineteen seventy-six in the wake of a
few decades of civil rights and radical
african-american activism in the u.s. in
the u.s. context in which blackness had
been a shorthand for poverty the
underclass and debility the slogan black
is beautiful or black is aristocratic
has an intense rhetorical force from
1974 285 Nevelson embarked on her homage
to Martin Luther King jr. a black
stacked wall work that is them in the
permanent collection of the studio
museum in Harlem accepted as a gift
around the time that the museum rewrote
its mission to include not only black
artists but also art objects by non
black artists that were inspired by or
in conversation with African diasporic
and african-american themes and I think
for me it's very interesting to think of
her in the 50s 60s and 70s as someone
not black standing up for black
not as threat or abyss but as resource
and plenitude dreamhouse 48 was recently
conserved by the Perez Museum of Art in
Miami and this photo with a team of mail
art handlers in blue gloves touching it
gently as they start to maneuver it into
a crate helps us mentally measure its
dimensions while it also also invokes
the attentions up keeps and maintenance
that attend to work like this long after
the death of the artist who brings such
an object into the world with similar
tending and assistance we're nevelson
sculptural homes comments about
housework or the labors of care about
never-ending tasks to be repeated maybe
but they also raise questions about the
stability of the home as a locus of
fragile privacy here constantly invited
to be violated by the viewer as well as
testing the boundaries of chores like
sorting fixing mending as they blossom
into full-scale contracts construction
projects that move beyond gendered
categories of the division of domestic
labor though she did not have a direct
relationship with activists feminism and
in fact once stated that she was not a
feminist but rather an artist who
happened to be a woman as her career
matured she became more and more
recognized within the feminist art
movement cited as an inspiration for
younger female artists as a critical
voice who constantly promoted
non-typical techniques of art-making
including carpentry as valid avenues for
women how might we understand Neville
sins feminism's been simultaneously and
paradoxically not only in relation to a
political movement rooted in a
particular time and as I said she
disavowed that political movement in her
own words but I still claim a Lin of
feminist lens for Nevelson as I
understand her feminism rather as a kind
of aesthetic a worldview of philosophy a
critical theory and maybe most
importantly as a method of relating
Neville sins dream houses coincide with
a more explicitly activist feminist
version of artistic home making that of
women house which was begun in 1971 and
open to the public in January and
februari of
in 72 right at the moment that nevelson
was making her dream houses as is well
known this was a project of the feminist
art program under judy chicago and miram
shapiro and the hands-on renovation of a
run-down house where women learned
skilled trades like carpentry was
considered part of women houses feminist
political emmitt sandy Oracle's linen
closet featuring a female mannequin
segmented by shelves in a closet
alongside folded towels creates an
ambiguous space in which the figure
appears both to be emerging from and
contained within the built-in
architectural element this pairing
underscores how there is not a literal
body and any of the dream houses
themselves but rather an implied figure
or figures that the viewer might project
as inhabitants and what this
juxtaposition with Oracle's linen closet
proposes in addition is that Neville
sins dream houses are in part kinds of
closets complex sites of secrecy and
disclosure many queer artists and art
historians in recent decades have
attempted to claim nevelson as one of
our own pointing to her live-in
assistant Diana McCown who was her
constant companion for over 20 years as
irrefutable proof of her by sexual
proclivities but we need turned to
biographical details to claim that
Nelson's work was invested in imagining
different kinds of queer domesticity
including accommodations that cut across
class and race lines I should say that
Nevelson did make brief forays into
Hughes besides black namely white and
gold but they were always very temporary
detours Don's wedding feast for instance
this installation was part of the
influential 16 Americans show at MoMA in
from 1950 in 1959 1960 likely because it
was by a woman and because of its
ostensibly feminist feminine title
coupled with its nuptial white it
received highly gendered responses in
the press including a review in which
the work is described as having quote
baroque finery lacy and latticed like a
small Victorian town with its wooden
houses and daintily fenced garden in
other words her work was seen as tidy
decorative domestic in the pejorative
sense of the limited and localized
rather than the universal confined to
the sphere of the family and the home
yet Don's wedding feast against those
terms of description is actually a
rather muscular peace filled with
assertive gestural statements that sees
the room fusing unlike elements together
with noble sins construction techniques
and her unifying paint as Nevelson has
written her work is about creating what
she calls a completeness she says it's
like a marriage you are not the total
actor you play with another and my plays
with the other are my materials in this
view marriage is not the state
sanctified ceremonial act between two
people but rather an act of mutual
animation that might occur between a
person and a thing thus such an
installation might be described as a
theatrical stage set or Amazon ascend
with objects or matter such as would not
serving as props but as fellow actors
playing vital roles in the preservation
of memory or modeling different kinds of
ways of being for their human companions
that is to say this art insists that how
we live among things and how they live
in us might tell us something about how
to treat all kinds of others not as
possessions but as possessed by or
possessing of meaning and history for my
last few sentences let me return to the
dreamhouse series where the walls of the
home keep shifting expanding becoming
variably porous as Nevelson makes and
remakes the same basic structure again
and again for Nevelson wood was the
stuff not only of carpentry but also of
aliveness and arrested but still layton
an ominous and here I'm not so much
referring to woods heralded qualities of
warmth but rather it's powerful
capacities to expand and adjust to
different climates to as it were breathe
if there are lessons to be learned from
Neville sins carpentry they might teach
us about dismantling gendered
associations with processes of making
and help us rican sieve architectural
spaces queer and capacious enough to
receive relations of all kinds thank you
hello everybody in thank you to the
organizers for the invitation to join
you I'm going to be speaking today about
design objects in museums some of the
ways in which we think about objects in
museums that cross the lines between art
design craft and cultural objects the
call for papers for the conference
placed this placed our talks in the
stature in the context of risky's recent
interest and success in transcending
traditional disciplinary boundaries to
encourage more holistic multifaceted
approaches to art and design practice my
talk I'd like to focus on disciplinary
boundaries and how museums use artifacts
and offer some suggestions and how we
might transcend those traditional
boundaries for a more holistic more
multifaceted museum the disciplines I'd
like to whose boundaries I'd like to
consider are those mentions in the title
of this session art craft design and
cultural artifacts there are art museums
craft museums design museums cultural
artifacts is a wringer here think it
perhaps is supposed to suggest
anthropology museums that's the
discipline that claims culture but I'd
like to be more open minded here and
leave that as a way to include not only
anthropology but history museums and the
range of museums that consider social
life each of these types of museums
addresses its collections differently
and each engages in defending its
boundaries they each have ways of
thinking about what's included and what
you should say about it as we sort
through the artifacts as we start the
artifacts of the world into categories
put them into museums based on those
categories we should think about what
we've lost disciplines have a way of
disciplining our thoughts and
understanding them or questioning them
or interrogating them can offer us away
outside those boxes museums tend to fall
back on their usual ways of telling
stories with objects I'd like to look at
some crossover objects objects that fit
uneasily within disciplines
and see if we can find some better ways
to present not only those objects in
exhibits but maybe all objects how might
breaking down the barriers make for more
interesting useful or provocative
exhibitions Thomas chair Meyer recently
suggested that there are three useful
categories for considering the ways that
museums you sleeps as works as specimens
and as witnesses we just described each
of those briefly by works what he means
is works of art the Mona Lisa is
presented as a work it's an original
Steven Greenblatt's famous description
if you would call this an object of
wonder Walter Benjamin would say it's an
object with an aura Benjamin I of
skillman would call it a unicum these
are all ways of saying it's authentic
special original and the displays
reflect this not always quite so
dramatically as no Mona Lisa but the
ways that we display art are to pull
them off put them by themselves let
visitors admire it you despite on a
white wall and give it a lot of space
you keep it with other objects of its
kind by specimens dime iron means
something like representatives of their
type natural history museums are full of
specimens in general any example of a
species is as good as any other cabinets
of curiosities by contrast were full of
special objects museums like this are
full of typical ones museums of Natural
History Foucault describes this as a
transition from the age of theater to
the age of the catalog specimens are
what you have in a catalog art museums
followed along to some extent in the
19th century when museums came to be
organized by school and date art became
in a way specimens as well as words this
displays an art or organized to tell
stories art museums fought over these
two ways of thinking about art for most
of the last two centuries were they
places to commune with great art
is places where you saw art as a work or
were they places to learn art history
that is a place you see specimens of our
history they're both of course and the
problem is trying to do two things at
once thank Myers third category is
witness these are objects to carry a
meaning because of where they were in
their pre museum life witness objects
are about use and source and provenance
in art museums pure witness objects are
rarely displayed though some might argue
that for example of fragments of ancient
sculpture or maybe a lot of ancient
objects fall into this category they're
not originally art but we treat them as
art because of their stories because of
what they witnessed but many aren't
objects do have a witness story to tell
in history museums witness objects cover
a wide range witnessing from daily
stories of use social history museums to
more dramatic stories of politics like
the Holocaust Museum this category i
think is similar to Greenblatt's
residents but it widens it in a useful
way it's more inclusive so each kind of
museum balances these categories
differently art museums one each work of
art to be considered as a work but they
also want to present art history and
consider artists specimens as examples
of the work of an artist or of a school
Natural History Museum's want to present
specimens they even call their objects
by that name in the early 20th century
there was this bad that natural history
museum is wanted to show off exceptional
specimens the largest elephant whatever
it was that sort of pushes you more
towards this idea of a work more towards
the idea of wonder anthropology museums
do all three they bounce between
treating objects as specimens and
acknowledging them as works of art or
putting them into context and calling
them witnesses that's why so many early
leaders in the field mused about putting
all their cases on wheels
this is a real trope in early writing
about anthropology museums history
museums generally want to tell stories I
make comparisons now change over time
and so they want the specimens to tell
the story risk but they depend on
witness objects to make the story seem
true the dual use of objects is
especially interesting to museums in
focused on trauma like Holocaust museums
where witness is so important museums
have an easy time when they treat an
object in one way or in their
traditional way it can be confusing when
they try to break the rules or mixed
modes of presentation the great example
of this which I don't have a slide of is
the elephant in the lobby of the
National History Museum in Washington
it's desperately trying to be a specimen
a witness and a work of art all at the
same time design objects in here let me
get to the particular interest of the
session design objects are particularly
complicated because they're about use as
well as about making we want to treat
them as art as works to give them that
special regard but we also need to think
about them telling their own story of
usefulness that is as witness objects we
don't like to think about them as
specimens because what distinguishes
them from everyday objects is their
design their specialness considering
these three categories of understanding
helps us understand the challenge of
displaying objects of design let me look
at a few examples very quickly so shaker
tools were embraced by art museums in
the 1930s because they somehow seemed
modernist they might be seen as works of
art but they're anonymous simple it's
hard to treat them as you would a
painting shakers would have thought
about them as technology and they fit
nicely into an anthropology exhibit on
sex or a American history exhibit they
really fall in between very different
kind of object but again a design object
that overlaps between
art and use and crafts this is the Ames
plywood splint it's a medical technology
at this bambbles basic level but taken
out of that context and considering the
place of the Ames's and modern designs
comes close to art lunch today I went up
and took a look at the Ames splint in
the 20th century gallery and it's right
next to a Calder sculpture it seems to
make perfectly good sense there one that
has always fascinated me the the Bell
Helicopter hanging at MoMA which I think
must confuse a lot of visitors to the
museum students it's nicely both as a
technology and as a design and in fact
it works pretty well as a work of art
hanging at MoMA and finally to include a
little bit of 19th century technology
the Gothic steam engine Gothic Revival
steam engine at the Henry Ford Museum
its technology but you can't think about
it is only a use item it's also about
culture and design it's a Gothic Revival
object as well as a steam engine
decorative arts more generally fall into
this view confused category and it's why
the period room is such a difficult
medium we want to claim furniture as
work of art but we know that they call
it solely that we are leaving out too
much of the story furniture is a
specimen and furniture is a witness
either to daily life or to wealth or to
history so again it tries to be all
three of these things if you look at the
period room one of the ways in which for
the last 100 years or so museums of
trying to deal with furniture you can
see some of that ambivalence that trying
to do three things at once so consider a
few attempts at period room displays the
some of the very first period rooms you
know the RISD museum likes to claim to
be the first s6 is right up there too
this is the essex institute 1907 we're
designed to present what the curator
called a truthful picture of interior in
the year 70
and so because it was supposed to be
truthful he felt perfectly free to use
reproductions to not to use actual
things was more important to have the
atmosphere of liveliness so he wasn't
interested in works so much as overall
feelings the old way he wrote was to
have a specimen placed upon a platform
today we put it in its relative position
that's associated with other articles of
the furniture of a room it takes it once
takes on new significance becomes almost
a living object so the room is a stage
set the examples in there are both works
of art but they're also specimens and
the witnesses the very strange period
rooms sort of partial period rooms at
the Berlin Jewish Museum have furniture
there in part to tell the story of
Jewish life in in Germany before World
War two but the story that's told about
them is as a witness of the Holocaust
the focus of the labels this way the
story is told is the story of the
travels of the pieces of furniture how
they left Germany and how they came back
to the museum that's what's interesting
it's the story of their life not as
useful objects but as objects of witness
the wonderful exhibit Maria common
selects just close that the
cooper-hewitt museum is a selection of
objects from the collection that is all
about her relationship with the objects
the text reads what is this room about
it's about falling in love with a group
of objects some of the objects are there
is works of art some like the chair
break all the rules of how you would
show a work of art some like Tuscany
these parents and left there are there
as witnesses they're telling the story
of the relationship with toscanini
summer specimens symbols of wealth
walking or
of childhood Murray Kalman's
introductory text advises users advises
visitor viewers to not think too much
unless it pleases you wonderful set of
labels listening today perhaps she is
acknowledging the challenge of thinking
about these things in the usual museum
way and asking us to think differently
or not to think at all it's not just
period rooms that wrestle with how to
mix these lobes consider what happened
when an art museum more precisely an
institute of contemporary art tried to
make sense out of the movement that
cross lines between art craft and design
the ICA the Institute of Contemporary
Art up in Boston displayed the Loom from
Black Mountain College as an art object
because that's what they do but in this
case it's really there as a witness
object or maybe even a little bit of
this object of showing what a little
look like that was use their the
timelines on the wall behind it treat
art objects as specimens to tell a story
sort of they played with this I think
not all that successfully trying to
treat all these objects in a variety of
ways how to play with that line between
art object and objective of history all
objects are complicated and I think that
design objects are particularly
complicated their artifacts that offer
great return if treated well but they
don't fit our usual way of thinking
about things they make us rethink our
categories and our modes of presentation
it's worth doing that doll I means you
might do a better job of fully
appreciating their collections and more
fully getting their visitors to
appreciate them if they open up beyond
the usual ways of treating objects let
me offer some possibilities as I
mentioned earlier there's this long
tradition of new history of museums of
suggesting that it would be easier if we
can just put all of our display cases on
wheels Pitt rivers the rivers museum
Frederick Lucas at the Brooklyn Museum
and George Brown Buddha the Smithsonian
all independently say
sort of shows up time and time again and
one can sympathize with them we want to
tell many different stories with the
artifacts but we also want to tell many
different kinds of stories and for that
reels will do it's not enough to move a
case from a synoptic series of specimens
to a featured work of art the modes of
display are different the digital it
might seem offers us might offers a
chance to virtually put all of our
artifacts on wheels like those early
20th century museum men wanted place
virtually they can where objects can
virtually flicker between categories or
occupy more than one at a time perhaps
but most digital museum presentations
turn everything into specimens they're
all flattened into two dimensions the
aura is gone and so often the story of
context another is to try to balance the
two parts of them use of an artifacts
life the making and the using the RISD
museum has begun to experiment with ways
to show making as part of an artifact
story it's done that by recognizing some
area by reorganizing some areas by
material and explaining tools and
techniques what if the museum added that
story of use well added the story of use
to the story of making objects would
begin to tell multiple stories and if
the making and use were integrated the
story of design would become more
prominent one more possibility think
about how the visitor interacts with and
make meaning of objects design connects
making and using and putting the visitor
into the position of using the objects
and asking about who they were made for
and how they were used might offer us
some insight that allows us to think of
objects as works specimens and witnesses
all at once thank
oh sorry first of all um I want to thank
the organizers here it go in Michael
especially thank you so much for
inviting me this is such a pleasure to
be here and to get the opportunity to
see these objects in the RISD museum has
been mind-blowing and I'm very excited
but anyway I'll get to my talk because I
know I don't have much time so um what
I'll be presenting today is essentially
a sketch for ideas pertaining to my
current book project so again not quite
fully worked out the book is tentatively
called frock coats and capital the
fashion economy before and after marks
something I hope that might ask act as a
provocation for conversation on his
panel which is I suppose what we're all
expected to do my aim is to frame the
question of aesthetics if I can say that
I'm even able to address that topic but
if I'm able to its to frame the question
of aesthetics within the world of dress
and dressing and specifically as this
top topic might again concern itself
with the long outdated or seemingly long
outdated concept of style especially
with an art history style is
particularly problematic thus I begin
with a two-part question by way of
introduction what can diagrams and
fashion plates used in the production
and consumption of garments tell us
about the relationship between fashion
and capitalism the idea of style and the
logic of management as these areas
converged in the 19th century how might
we frame or reframe the intersection
between art historical philosophical and
political economic understandings of
fashion and fashioning style and
management at that moment but also today
so throughout the 19th century in the
domains of aesthetics and political
economy questions of style and modes of
production burgeoned and often
overlapped the architect gottfrid's m /
for instance posed in 1860 that ways of
dressing and ways of working were 10
kisses in accordance with his big lie
domes Prince eep dressing principle a
concept discussed throughout the first
volume of his style and the technical
and tectonic arts or practical
aesthetics xem / saw style not only as a
decorative formal feature of
architectural elements like facades or
columns but also as a technique a way of
working several years years later Karl
Marx would use the German word Hawk
signifying the fashionable frock coat of
the time in the famous passages
concerning 20 yards of linen and a coat
in chapter 1 of Das Kapital which is
1867 initially there by putting a
sartorial item at the center of his
theory of the commodity and the
capitalist machine moreover by coining
the term products Jones visa in German
in order to describe the mode of
production as its translated marks
interjected into his critique of
capitals arbitrary system of value and
labor the discussions of art and visa
happening in design especially perhaps I
would argue as it pertained to the new
logic of fashion flowing in magazines
department stores and literature in
other words Marx's mode of production
spoke the same language of Zephyrs
practical aesthetics two works that
found their origin not coincidentally in
their experiences of London in the 1850s
they were both expatriated there after
the dresden uprisings so first
understand a bit about the relationship
between management and style or the
management of style we might benefit
from a little bit of background the
material history of textile production
I'll just say a couple notes two
intersecting developments took place in
the 16th century first with the
proliferation of print media designs for
woven knitted an embroidered cloth were
recorded as codes and patterns on paper
and distributed as books for the use of
workshops
at the same time textile production was
submitted to an incipient form of
management in this case a division
between intellectual and manual labor or
planning and execution that would later
determine the spatial arrangement of
factories thus alongside print
capitalism cloth capitalism emerged
beginning in the 18th century and
rapidly progressing throughout the 19th
century a new development took place as
a fashion economy developed in concert
with consumer capitalism the production
of clothing in Europe and America came
to be mediated through patterns and
plates schematic and pictorial
representations an explosion of
magazines and guidebooks meant for
Taylor's dressmakers later sweatshop
managers and consumers made clothing
adhere to the logic of the image a
recognizable style that could be
replicated with the imaging of
ready-made apparel on paper came the
outlines of a new operative and economic
mode what I'm calling fashion capitalism
so diagrams and plates found on
two-dimensional substrates form the
image space through which this economy
was figured enacted and consumed at this
point all articles of clothing from
coats two skirts acquired a somewhat
paradoxical identity as an exchangeable
type a commodity with a constantly
variable yet individual style markets
began to fluctuate according to seasons
and moods hence by 1902 economic
historian Vera nurse on Bart would
observe quote fashion is the favorite
child of capitalism fashion arose from
its inner essence and expresses its
character as do a few other phenomena of
our contemporary life now Benedict
Anderson as many of you know once coined
the term print capitalism to talk about
among other things the way the speed of
communication made it possible for
rapidly growing numbers of people to
think about themselves and to relate
themselves to others in profoundly new
days print commodities generated a new
market in which the printing and
distribution of texts intermingled with
the rapid reformation of ideas and
communities fashion capitalism's
emergence relied on the physical and
figurative matrix that print provided
but its specificity once again to
refashion human relations and they
became we might say a bit more fickle as
clothing became absorbed into the
fashion economy diagrams and images
organized and managed the production and
marketing of new styles but also new
ways of thinking about class work
society life sexuality race literature
art etc fashion capitalism's mode of
management generated new ways to manage
the production of style the
repeatability and also the specificity
of modes and fashions became a crucial
feature of modern culture and thought
its arrangements and rhythms the concept
of style proliferated across the arts
and economy note the words mode and
style imply something that is at once
spatial and temporal a way of doing and
managing things style is both a concept
and a cultural technique to borrow a
term from German media theorist
bernhards egret a cultural technique
would define as a more or less complex
actor network that comprises
technological objects as well as the
operative chains they are part of and
that configure or constitute them to
style then is to cut lines and perform
operations in keeping with those lines a
mode is a fashionable look and a
specific way of fashioning or managing
making
that's the specific convergence of the
twin concepts of Management and style is
encapsulated in a strategy of dressage
first detailed by lemme tease the
machine and discussed by Foucault and
discipline and punish Foucault notes how
matriz text is quote both a materialist
reduction of the soul and a general
theory of jess's at the centre of which
reigns the notion of docility which
joins the analyzable body to the
manipulable body a body is docile that
may be subjected used transformed and
improved dressage in the case of fashion
capitalism operates somewhat like this
but is also a bit different unlike the
soldier who begins to obey whatever he
is ordered to do his obedience is prompt
and blind the consumer the sweatshop
worker and the sweatshop worker follow
patterns or styles of lines with a bit
more visual attenuation they are perhaps
more like the two athletes found in the
classical equestrian sport of dressage
where the horse and the worker the horse
as the worker and the rider the branded
model consumer become one in sync both
are trained together dress and dressage
converge dressage in this way indicates
the moment where management becomes self
management we're a mode of managing the
production of clothes overlaps with the
mode by which vanqor's draw donned frock
coats and ladies wore corsets with style
as dressage both in and outside of the
factory human bodies put on different
sizes and shapes new configurations of
class work and imaginary cells at the
same time style signals a migration from
a material to an immaterial condition
this is why a pattern is adaptable as
art historian Williams our lender writes
quote stylist we recall from our Latin
dictionary it's meant originally simply
the pen as the tool for writing soon
however in fact as early as with the
rhetorical writings of Cicero above all
with the orator and
toria date oratory the term stylist came
to be used in a figurative sense much as
we speak in English of affluent or an
elegant pen the ambiguous yet controlled
formal system that constitutes the look
or repeated flourish say the style of a
historical period or a building implicit
care implicitly carries the DNA of this
for stylist within it as a virtual code
so style as we understand it now has no
necessary material ground like a diagram
it may be flexibly transferred from one
format or material to another it
migrates and adapts by definition it is
malleable eva's even as it gets
something in line xem / for instance
drafted the figure of clothing into his
foundational treatise on architectural
style in several drawings made by the
architect in preparation for his first
volume on textile art we might note how
a certain curve or circle migrates from
one form to the next so the outline of
the amphora occupies the same page as a
draft for his drawing of the Gaelic not
of threads which are also serpents as
though transposed or copied from one
side to the other an ear becomes the
handle of a certain vase and vice versa
well address statue becomes a column
again the blacklight ohms print seat so
this is the logic of style as the thread
or not or line in the form of a diagram
gets transferred from one represented
thing to the next one medium to another
say textiles into architecture into
ceramic etc all materials are rendered
equivalent we might say then that the
line is promiscuous at MacLaren's plinth
soup that wanders from medium to medium
that's not quite central to the
production of material commodities per
se style as dressage is nevertheless
important to the arrangement and flow of
capital it is the necessary precondition
apps at once regulatory and adaptable a
frame and a flexible sieve again the
style or mode of production called
capital fashion capitalism's patterns
and plates get us in line but only
provisionally hence we adapt every
season we shift with its moods again
fashion capitalism describes the
historical matrix in which the
management production and marketing of
garments was at a material level
increasingly mediated by patterns and
plates but it was also a far-reaching
attitude or cultural epistane marked by
an explosion of thought in the arts to
fully grasp fashion capitalism therefore
it is necessary for a moment to examine
how beginning in the midnight 1800's
discussions of clothing and fashion
proliferated across Europe and America
within and against the contours of this
historical network a number of texts
were written in which clothing became
the subject of philosophical music from
Hegel to marks the practices of draping
dressing cloaking and changing served
theoretical purposes clothing thereby
became a figure of thought that is a
plastic come rhetorical device now a
certain trilogy of texts from this
milieu Thomas Carlisle's Sartor Resartus
Gottfried's emperors dare steal and the
first chapter of Karl Marx's Das Kapital
notably built a set of complex arguments
around this cotillion figure disclosing
a link between clothing and the purse or
the logic of economic exchange Carlyle
and marks for instance took note of the
seemingly magical means through which
linen turned into clothing clothing into
commodities commodities into money and
money into social rank for zimbra
meanwhile clothing as a cultural
technique what he called the Baku items
plenty helped him articulate the
slippery logic of style with in
architecture these authors use the
metaphor of clothing to explore the
comparably unstable terrains of
philosophy architecture and capital
so clothing in these three texts
functioned as a rather provisional
figure it was used to mark the shift
from one register something that is worn
to keep warm to another a linguistic
metaphor or symbol of value what marks
would call the vet form as a placeholder
the value form as a placeholder clothing
was understood to initiate the movement
for materiality to ideas technique to
style specific to abstract labour use
value to exchange value clothing single
signaled the movement of things into
other things hence the commodity and
specifically the coat in Marx's text was
the taiga phone vat as the word he used
the phrase uses which means the wearer
of value or the bearer of value and in
wearing this value it could be changed
or exchanged for another style now so
for the sake of time I'll use the very
couple minutes remainder of my talk to
focus on the first example Carlisle's
satirical Sartor Resartus a fictive
review of a philosophy of clothes by a
fictive German philosopher named do
guinness toy fills took published in
serial form over two years between 1831
and 1833 this is a good example insofar
as the author through a very
characteristic and slippery style
seamlessly combines a critical and an
uproarious voice idealism slips into
materialism and back again through
Carlisle's language a riotous descent
and to the gritty world of clothes is
mapped through metaphysics and vice
versa or is the fictional reviewer
rights of toy phul stocks book with all
this descendant ilysm he combines a
transcendentalism no less superlative
carlisle or toefl took or the anonymous
reviewer were never quite certain who is
speaking in this polyphonic text that's
rights in this sugat pseudo who galiyon
voice quote matter exists only
spiritually and to represent some idea
and body at fourth but also contain
mooing he can the author considered
concedes that quote man's earthly
interests are all hooked and button
together and held up by clothes
recounting toefl strokes argument
Carlyle as reviewer lists his principles
first that man is a spirit and bound by
invisible bonds to all men secondly that
he wears clothes which are the visible
emblem of this fact indeed from the
Kings mantle downwards clothes are
emblematic not only of want but of a
manifold cunning victory over want so
what is delineated as clothes throughout
Sartor Resartus we might say as a
provisional figure driven by a mutable
logic the language twists and turns and
so we are never quite sure where the
voices stand on the matter of clothes
the metaphor of clothes might shift from
spirit to stuff in a matter of a
sentence our clothes armatures that prop
up our place in society the material
real or are they props of the aesthetic
imagination are they the despicable
based products that humanity relies on
yet forgets as it performs mundane tasks
or do they body forth highgate Hagel's
is that experience workloads quote
unspeakably significant the reviewer at
one point rights perhaps not once in a
lifetime does it occur to your ordinary
biped of any country or generation be
he'd gold mantel prints or russet jerk
and peasant that his vestments and his
self are not one and indivisible he that
he is naked without vestments till he
buy or steal such and buy for thought so
and button them so clothing quote as
quote despicable we think of it Carlyle
suggests is essential to humans as
social beings before speaking before
entering into some form of social
intercourse we dress we get in line
clothing is the naturalized idealized
armature of the social real it is the
cultural technique through which the
human animal exists
squeeeee a human quite simply he writes
as an omnivorous biped that wears
breeches the satirist vez maps out a
paradoxical world in which a pseudo hog
alien aesthetic philosophy slips between
different stylistic modes so to conclude
then I'd like to end with one final
provocation rather inspired by the
slippery logic of this satirical
treatise how might a reading of dress
and fashion help to reframe this the
aesthetics of contemporary life that is
sophisticated systems of branding and
style which are often bound up with one
another arguably mediate all aspects of
contemporary life from the consumption
of goods to social media relations to
the practices of artists and celebrities
alike I'm wagering that the emergence of
fashion capitalism in the 19th century
can help us to understand the creative
economy of the last 30 years thank
I'm trying to do is with your very
different paper and topics to what some
of the broader questions of this
supposed that is about the
transdisciplinary and about a special
and one thing that struck me being in
our historians like to you as well as a
temp table this morning was this
question of the aesthetic experience and
I thought for whom you might reflect on
what people like John Dewey or gotta
more often suggest is that what is more
important is the aesthetic experience
rather than defining some kind of
concept of art and I would argue that
some of the disciplines that we come
from have a lot to do with defining
concepts it might be a little less about
aesthetic experience per se so I thought
we could maybe a little bit about are
these polarities can they work together
and then to also think through that
further and think about what does that
mean for teaching me pedagogically and
each point what does it mean for display
purposes
I'm not sure people were able to hear
the question it was a multi-faceted and
interesting question about
transdisciplinary aesthetics and I'm not
gonna be able to repeat it that's fully
you all heard um it's I I do feel that s
one of the very few artists sort of a
valid art historians as part of this
conference that this word aesthetic is
pretty tricky actually for us and that
at least since the publication of the
book the anti aesthetic it has been
something it I wouldn't say it's taboo
but it's definitely not a critical term
with a huge amount of purchase in
conversations at graduate art history
seminars in part I think because the
idea that something might be
aestheticized has become a bit of a slur
the idea that especially a political
experience or a critical experience that
that it wanted slides into the realm of
the aesthetic that something has been
lost there and that's not that's not me
talking that's kind of the consensus
than the graduate art history seminar I
suppose in the last 1 30 40 years and I
think part of that has been is perhaps
the result of more of a focus on
questions of production so studio
questions questions of making questions
of process the question of what how
something comes into being as a
privilege site of interrogation perhaps
over the question of the individual
viewers experience of that object and of
course there are reception studies and
of course people are really interested
in how objects circulate but I this is
again I'm speaking so in such broad
strokes here but I would say that the
question of aesthetics within
contemporary art history is has been a
little bit repressed so it's a super
interesting for me to be part of this
conversation and to hear it surfaced and
also to hear the role of the imagination
so exalted which i think is important
and wonderful and kind of bracing so i'm
speaking up to your question a little
bit about pedagogy and how i mean in
some ways I do think part of my
challenge as a professor of art history
is to get student graduate students
especially because I do feel like I'm
training you know the next generation
how to get them to not feel that talking
about the experience of confronting an
object how that has its own value but
that's also the making of the meaning
you know and that those experiences are
so variable and of course they are very
contingent and there's all of these
things but that we shouldn't just rule
them out of mouths there's one answer
it's such an interesting question
because it seems like the more you're
trained in this field the last year is
supposed to actually have those you know
real authentic reactions because they're
always filtering it through art history
whatever it might be filtering through
the theory and so what came to my mind
with your question about aesthetic
experience is to wander through a big
universal Art Museum say the Met and
think about what's there that's not art
but is sort of shown as I and the place
it comes to mind first is the Egyptian
displays at the at the mat which are
packed full of things that were never
thought of badass art don't look like
art you know whether it's Egyptian toys
or Egyptian utensils and to try to think
how it is that those things clearly
because of the way that they're
displayed because of what what they
showed they they they give us an
aesthetic response and that they become
a set aside in some way I think you
might be able to do the same thing with
costumes in some ways and you know that
line between what is fashion and what is
art could be an interesting thing to
play with
compression so I it's I guess the other
thing I think about is the way in which
think about to watch visitors to museums
wander through the collections wander
through the incentives and see what
appeals to them so I'm sorry pushing
away from myself to other people but to
see what what they get an aesthetic
response how that changes met that I
think we started no question I just yeah
yeah we don't deliver um gosh there's so
much one can say and actually I was
really inspired by your talks and had
lots of questions I hope that have an
opportunity to ask on that regard maybe
I'll start then first of all with this
is that just following up something that
Julia said that the question of
aesthetics in art history is like deeply
embedded historically and like often a
question of concert ship and the
discipline or the field of art history
has worked really hard over many
generations even to kind of combat that
that facile appreciation logic which is
about which is mostly based in a logic
of consumption of course then then much
to the detriment of any thinking about
actually how things are made
because you think of it as a consumable
object that is distant disparate for me
that I experience that has no kind of
sense of the nuances and multiple layers
that go into the practice of making
which there are many many different
kinds and often many steps involved
along the way so that's been something
that I've been interested in looking at
precisely because of this this attempt
to kind of move away from that idea of
thinking of this object as a as a formal
object right is something that's
delineated and is static and has no kind
of boom neither a pre life nor an
afterlife anyway so that's so those are
some observations i have about aesthetic
experience that I think that's different
than what do is talking about and I
think that the question of aesthetics is
being discussed at this conference
obviously we opens up that that term
because we're not thinking about
aesthetic experience only from the
consumers vantage that is like the art
museum visitor or appreciator or buyer
of artifacts but also the experience had
by the people who are on the ground so
to speak in the process of making and
that of course then goes into pedagogy
and I'm being a bow house scholar
initially and my my world is all about
how aesthetic experience could be rina
gated remapped rethought through the
experimental process that it could be
opened up a new thoughts new ideas would
come out of that um so I also want to
say though that part of the reason why I
was interested in talking about the
question of style and I have been kind
of we reexamine oppression of style
which of course is like dip like the
depths of like the worst of art history
um in it but if you I'm in and you know
it's where historicism it's like comes
out of it's like this really problematic
let's put every nation or every temporal
period or every movement or every
whatever into this nice clean little
thing and I and I've been interested in
I guess doing what I'm calling a
political economy of style or so
understanding how the language of style
is it was emerging in the eighteenth and
nineteenth century was actually as a
historical phenomenon bound up with the
kind of movement of fashion and
capitalism at that time but I think that
now having that thought I'm actually now
going back and rethinking style and all
the kind of possibilities that I can
open up for thinking about ways of doing
things and modes of production and
operations and so it's no longer just
this crystallized force that it sits in
a museum but is rather this kind of way
to think about how things are done the
style of production the mode of
production and so anyway so this is so
it may I think that pertains to Dewey
for sure having been influenced of
course at Black Mountain and where
everyone was experimenting with the new
how how do you approach this and and
that that kind of opening up spaces for
new questions more than a closing them
down mm-hmm so I'm thinking about your
egos directive and I'm going to now ask
the audience if they have any questions
and then I will come back to the panel
yeah I wonder if you might all think a
little bit about how the impact of
colonialism and confrontation with the
other may have perhaps given aesthetics
a kind of undies in our own time you
know as the in the global turn but i'm
also very specifically thinking about
fashion and style and the way that those
norms of western european cultural you
know the dressage get the colonial the
Colonials in line by having them all
duress and sending them the
two-dimensional you know fashion
examples there's there's a lot to be
said between you know european and and
other cultures relationships in the
question of aesthetics can I can I turn
the question I don't want to I'm going
to answer it actually not from the word
of aesthetics but the entire title of
this panel is really fraught with those
questions I think because the lines
between what is art what is craft what
is the cultural artifact I think are so
much related to colonial encounters and
have been so structured by racialized
knowledge is so I just want to make mark
that no that's actually kind of in mind
when one thing that I'd say which is
actually a response to Stevens the
categories and I can't remember
you're chairman okay I'm not familiar
with that but anyway so um thinking
about entities what is often now called
within anthropology cultural belongings
of indigenous people like not artifacts
not static objects that are dead but
things that are also actively part of
the culture and are potentially made to
be ready right they're not ready made
they're made to be ready this is I'm
borrowing this phrase from my colleague
Danna Claxton who's first nations woman
in Canada and and indeed actually the
term cultural belonging is actually
really interesting in this regard and
I'll get back to the colonial question
and like the whole like dressage
question but um that's that doesn't fit
into any of these three categories it's
neither the witness nor the young I
would argue it's not the witness it's
not the specimen it's not the work of
art because or the work right because it
is it is it gains its pout like a mask
for instance within first nations like
Co Salish culture might reside or have
the stewardship of the Museum of
Anthropology in British Columbia in
Vancouver but the way that the curators
now understand it is that this mask
perhaps in order to kind of it has to
live right it's the sentient under it's
understood to be sentient and it has to
then be taken back up by the community
is supposed to have that whose object is
there part of our cultural belongings
and so these objects kind of migrated
back and forth between the museum and
the community in order to kind of keep
this object and I'm using that word very
problematically alive right so it's
actually kind of interesting it's not
simply like a matter of like
preservation it stays this but it's like
the categories just don't work so
Western I'll say for a minute you're
just aesthetics just doesn't work and
this within this framework anyway so
that that is that was actually kind of
thought in response to that but then
asked a question of the colonial is
super important and actually I was
thinking like bodies there's a great
moment when Parenthood Seeger talks
about what cultural techniques do and
one of the things they do is colonize
and decolonize bodies and dress colonize
was indeed colonizes the body because on
the one hand like think about the slave
who is not given proper clothes or
doesn't have the close to that they you
know and then by dressing you can search
your status become decolonized at the
same time that you're also getting in
line with the new system so I would say
it's like actually quite complicated i
get almost like are more ontological
level there that it's about that
relationship you have that that
aesthetic relationship which of two
dress which is on the one hand or
restriction and on the other
a mode of opening up a possibility so
the colonial question is super
complicated obviously the history of
colonialism a cloth and of Trade and
everything is like enormous
I want to speak between the discussion
back to Sarah's opening question because
I think the two to rehabilitate the idea
of aesthetics it's very important all
three speakers have insightful things to
say but then all three were speaking
about objects and it's that exists Dewey
made us realize it's about experience
that's about how we experience objects
or situations or practices and so I
think it's important to relate the
objects back to experience qualified as
it is by many things culture ethnicity
history and all the rest but but the
focus is and if a sense is on objects
it's on the the perceptual experience of
things informed by the meetings and
history that culture provides so that
that's a very important turn and I think
essentially to this conference
say one word about the invention Dewey
thinking about doing a museums brings
you to the Barnes Foundation which in
fact no was so far out of the mainstream
they wanted their their visitors the
people in the school there they had
experienced that those objects in a way
that other museums really shied away
from and it's sort of an interesting
counterexample to the way the rest of
the world thought about objects they
about fire they turned it into objects
rather than experience it's sort of
interesting in the last decade or so as
museums I guess have rediscovered guey
so much of the educational work museum
cell is about experience again and not
about objects so it is come back into
fashion in the museum world I think in a
way that draws arm and builds upon some
of that sense of experience rather than
option maybe I said that the birds who
introduced duita art might say a wrote a
book called the art in pain there in
painting at the art of painting and the
focus was on painting his experience
rather than his object it's a critical
turn in a play to know that there's a
return
well in so much contemporary art as well
which is which has de-emphasized the
object and is much more about the
creation let's say of a social situation
I think the word experience has really
been problematized also and a lot of
critics especially have been thinking
about well it's not about having an
aesthetic experience it's about having a
difficult experience or a you're having
I mean you're being challenged in a way
that isn't necessarily about the field
of the visual I guess or the field of
the sensory you're meant to feel
uncomfortable you're going to feel
enraged your min to feel provocation
that isn't I think fully that I think
that the category of the aesthetic gets
that some of that but not all of that in
some of the new practices of socially
engaged art I actually have on I teach
sculpture here at RISD and I actually
have on my syllabus the quote from
barnett newman which says don't think
think of objects as triggers for
experience and i think a lot of the
conversation that i'm very happy seems
to be very live and back in the studio
environment is around ideas of affect
and effect theory and i think partly
it's the difficulty that we have with it
is it's very difficult to put into
language you know we're talking about
things that are on the sort of register
of a signification and so when you try
to in a critique talk about what the
thing is doing as opposed to what it
means we're all like it's really hard
but I think there is certainly with
students that I've encountered I think
partly their interest in performance
which has been reignited in in recent
times is to do with this desire to sort
of activate this kind of you know the
sort of zone of encounter between what
they are producing and the experience of
the viewer and I think effect might be
an interesting way
to sort of begin to also be able to talk
about experience but the experience that
is sort of emanating from the object as
opposed to maybe the body in a
performative way sorry that wasn't a
question that was a great comment thank
you yes I can just like to speak to that
what and it kind of goes back to the
previous question so I'm sorry I'm going
to kind of collapse you too even though
I don't think that they are the same um
but in fact actually I would agree with
you that one of the problems and much of
our history is it's too focused on two
objects and I'm of course and that's why
I'm interested in the processes of
making and stuff so how things actually
come into being and that itself is a
kind of aesthetic experience maybe not
for the consumer but for the worker
right but I think that one has to I
guess I would push the question back on
you which is well how can you I mean the
idea of experience as a kind of abstract
experience I mean doesn't it always
require object I me don't we live in a
world of things right we live in a world
that are changing us impressing upon us
doing things to US making us effectively
perhaps mobilizing us to experience and
act and new and different
ways so being able to kind of think
about the specificity of the way certain
objects change you is I think really one
of the key things that our historians
are able to do that often other people
can't do because they just don't pay
enough attention to the specificity of
that object experience and rather than
thinking going a writ large experience
because yes at all experience we
experience that's what we do right but
if we're sensitive beings um but I guess
and then I also have like a problem of
the experience and experience economy
being this like you know ultimately
Marxist whatever like experience
economies is the new hit thing right and
so well okay great so we're going to
think about experience but experiences
like can be capitalized to and marks and
one said oh well you know there's useful
things that can't be valued like air
that's done right Xperia was also
capable honest so let me in we're gonna
I don't know there's some ways in which
a lot of the stuff can be as I think
that from my perspective I have to kind
of be attentive to thinking about and
probably because our history is also so
close to part market that we are always
very attentive about this kind of very
problematic relationship between market
and object history anyway so that was
kind of a response to that maybe not so
much in response to affect
it's hot it's hard to resist asking
questions when you're walking around
with a microphone I'm going to stop
resisting I actually like sea view your
discussion of work specimen and and
witness and thinking about the Black
Mountain College showed that was great I
think you write the loom the piano and
then the third thing non thing there was
the stage for performances right I mean
they were they I think they were
intended to use that yo-yo three terms
as specimens by but they tended to
collapse into works but they were tent
intended in the show as far as I
understood thousand molesworth
intentions and everybody else involved
is talk about the experience of an
experimental ism a black mountain so
those the looms oh on I think we're
there to render all the other would be
objects of a works in two specimens or
better witnesses they were all witnesses
the Black Mountain College so what they
were trying to reenact what is the
experience of Black Mountain as a form
of the club experimentalism itself so I
mean when you talk about those
categories being all used together it's
I think it's the slippage from one to
another right so they may have intended
that they be used as witnesses the loom
in particular but people were walking
around it as if it were an object right
but but the performer but when the
performances were going on at the same
time it was hard not to say wait this is
not an object this is not a work this is
this is supposed to be you were there
went by impossible do you know I when I
was there I did not see them actually
using a long to know if they did was it
was it was there somebody there reading
I never saw anybody using it but I was
told there were times when there was a
demonstration but I never saw that
myself is it inevitable if it's a
question for you
building on my goals important question
which is it does the venue really
severely limit the slippage between
those categories I mean do you feel that
the just the title of the space is
really a pretty prescriptive well so
interesting to look at the say Native
American objects of Art Museum in
anthropology museum and that that
playing with that what categories they
fit in or religious objects in all of
these places going back to your question
about Native American your comment
religious objects Phil very odd place
into museums today's at some level are
still alive but at the other hand they
are now turned into something else and
anthropology museums will treat them
very different than art museums do so
again what I'm interested in is always
this look at just between those and how
even say in the case of live oh I see a
how they had a certain style of treating
objects that didn't quite work there or
with craft objects in the museum there's
always a sort of a little bit the sense
that they're struggling to make sense
out of it and that that's what I find
you and related common not so much a
question is that it seems that Julie
you're your top was really dealing with
if we stay with these categories the
witness but not less an object you said
as a method of relating so you going
beyond what Nelson said about your work
itself right which which could render it
into more of an object you made it into
something more like a witness and
clothes seem to be you can't make sense
of what you're doing the political
political economy out unless you think
of it as something other than an object
the last thing I want to say is about
the issue of experience just with Dewey
is an experience for doing is difficult
there's a side of Dewey that people tend
to focus on about the which is more
reestablishing some kind of harmony or
something but one of his metaphors is
about hunger right that you are when
you're hungry you're
this equilibrium with your environment
and the hungry is an expression with
that all in turn gives form to that
expression 2 etcetera metal expression
of other you are totally right i was
getting a very brief gloss of clare
bishop who I wish would I who I don't
think has ever addressed that look that
kind of the negativity of doing what she
should know I mean it would people shift
from object to experience or something
and think about you know getting
aesthetics back on the table out of the
closet and so on as soon as you start
thinking of one was thinking of
experience as merely aesthetic and
creating harmony than aesthetics goes
back in the closet so that there are
other tools out there so i'll give it up
yeah so one comment to Steve which is
one of things that always intrigues me
in museums is that there are all of
these objects that we think of as not
having been created to be art objects
that fill our museums but many of the
things that we don't think of is not
having been created to be hard objects
that fill our museums are in fact the
paintings huge numbers of which are in
fact crucifixions but Donna's and child
and and all of this and that in fact
near this stuff that is the the most
quintessential art object of all from
the Western perspective the painting in
many many cases was not intended to be
an art object either but but my my
question really is about the
relationship between art history and
aesthetics and one of that's been
interesting is that hard history
departments have been rapidly changing
their names now to art history and
visual culture departments and I wonder
if that change isn't in part related to
the rejection of aesthetics and the
rejection of curatorship because it
seems to me as long as you think of it
as art history then there has to be some
implicit or tacit decision mechanism
that separates out what is worth writing
about and what is not worth writing
about and that the very question about
what is art is in fact an aesthetic
question and when you decide that this
is worth talking about even though
you're not explicitly engaged in
aesthetic discourse there has to be some
sort of aesthetic decision making going
on there and then once it becomes art
history individual culture which is
still privileged in art history but
maybe that's just for it's just
alphabetical that's to something well I
mean I think it really should just be
visual culture right why isn't it right
but but then is there any limit to what
is worth discussing right or is anything
visual fair game right i mean which i
think the honest rejection of aesthetics
would require to be the case well i just
will speak from very brief anecdotal
experience which was that i was the
director of a ph.d program in visual
studies at UC irvine for four years
which didn't which was just called
visual studies there wasn't the artistry
part was it wasn't there and it was
everything I mean graduate students were
writing about everything from mommy
blogs you know which actually hardly had
a visual component at all to yeah I mean
it was really fit any intellectual
argument could be made to justify just
about any topic that they wanted to work
on and for some and for some people in
the department it was very problematic
because it was a big loss in terms of
well there is a specialized activity
there have been a series of specialized
activities over history that have come
to be known as the making of art and
that what happens when we that is so
decentered from the intellectual project
of the of this you know the discipline
that we that that we have no shape
anymore I was agnostic on that I thought
it was
I mean it's it for me you know our
history since the visual turn or since
sort of the inauguration of visual
studies has been a reinvigorated place
and I think it's wonderful to think
about precisely the poorest knows the
boundary lessness and then the policing
of the boundaries what sometimes you
know when those kind of sharp divisions
come to matter but i would say that
there are places where that the
inauguration of visual studies has met
really that any kind of cultural
production visual with any kind of
visual component even if it's text on a
blog is totally counts I could just talk
about oh we recently renamed our
department here from history of art and
art architecture to history of art and
visual culture meaning that we're
concerned with the history of art and
the entire history of visual culture so
I think our idea was we wanted
everything to be inclusive in the study
of visual culture and um so that's that
we look at advertising art we look at
photo photography of all kinds we look
at medical diagrams we look at
everything in anything with the eye of
an art historian I'm intrigued by the
four concepts of this session art design
craft and cultural artifacts and what
strikes me in thinking about those four
terms is that art design and craft both
also we have a practice dimension to
them but culture as well as an object or
artifact dimension but this this other
term cultural artifact just has the
object dimension to it not so much the
practice dimension and I wonder if I
wonder how that works out in terms of
the slipper chest and then I was
thinking about the idea of cultural
artifact including you know the object
of art the object of design objective
crafts so in that sense being broader
than the others more encompassing but at
the same time during system
engine of culture to the label cultural
artifact so I wonder how the signifier
of culture works in that context and in
which sense that is useful to you given
your various analytics and whether how
you get away from the association
between culture and national culture if
you want a certain level of generality
there I realize it's quite a broad
question two questions there the first
part the cultural artifact actually I
mean it's important to think that
artifact is like just generally a term
that refers to anything made by human
hands right so this is so often i will
say in my class you know we're looking
at artifacts and i qualify that by
saying you know we're looking at things
that are made by humans and not animals
or maybe or those you know like
non-human animals right and I the
emphasis for me is on the make is on
that fact that it's made so I would
actually suggest that cultural artifact
but then something that maybe it's not
just made by one human but is made by a
whole kind of cultural network a whole
kind of community or group or
potentially so that's how I would open
up culture called there's culture of
course within cultural studies was
already from the get-go problematize the
point would be that it would not in like
the 50s not halt Raymond Williams even
like we're talking we're not talking
about culture isn't the best that's
thought and said we're talking about
just the things that people do an
interaction human interaction with one
another but the sort of questions and
things that are generated so I
personally I mean having gone to a
visual and Cultural Studies program and
having I started out in art history as
an undergrad got my full of October
formalism and went on to visual cultural
studies because I was I flew my flu as
far away as I could for a moment of
course not have gone back a little bit
but I think that one thing to kind of
where I think culture and vision the
term visual culture can be
useful as we're not thinking about a
single monographic maker and that the
default within our history is often to
go back to a single offer a single maker
when and this is why craft and design
have been at the outskirts because they
can't they don't I mean yes the fashion
designer but as Allison pointed out
earlier there's a whole kind of
community of people like in a film right
you've got a quote unquote author but
really the film is made by multiple
actors and I think cultural artifact
maybe like material culture is like
another term that people use it's useful
because it's it's acknowledging the fact
that we're not only ever in the realm of
like one dude in front of a painting
right so and so for me that's obviously
especially useful because i don't i'm
not interested in monographic i mean
once in a while i mean i just wrote
something on do chocolate but you know i
mean like it but for the most part right
you know we have to i think it's really
important that our history move away
from that because that is not useful
it's a very it can it can really be
problematic the courses we just saw a
beautiful thing Louise nevelson who
hasn't been written about and there's
the value in the monograph because it
allows you to talk about someone whose
work is really interesting but does it
hasn't kind of had any recognition so
obviously you can do both though right
I've never let myself write a monograph
before so it feels like it feels like a
treat to my own scholarly so a few
minutes left I don't know if this I
think there's another question okay
first I wanted to say that machines make
artifacts it's not just human so if you
do video
I didn't hear you say that okay you know
I and then there's animals who make
things you know bird net bird's nest and
technical Oh slippage Wow okay you're
making the definitions here I think the
point is it's not just an object so the
just a difference you say it's not an
object it's something that's made fine
doesn't have to be okay okay um so I'm
going to push it into maybe a sort of
more crafts level but since you brought
up market uh I was going to say and ask
everyone so you've got visual culture
and and you've got the world of our you
know the you know the under market and
however you want to define the you know
the whole art discourse as being more
and more diverse like every week and at
the same time we still have this
hierarchy of gatekeepers despite the
fact that there are a lot of DIY things
going on so I wonder if any of you have
thought about this relationship between
you know visual culture art history /
visual culture and the gatekeepers and
the function I can't teach art history
without making that kind of like
fundamental point that what counts is
art within our history as a historical
it's kind of been it has a pro bono
that's been written about it has been
put in a museum it has been you know and
those qualifications are those armatures
that apparatus those gatekeeping that
gate keeping practice is absolutely
fundamental to the definition of what
qualifies something as art versus the
rest of the stuff so it's not just a
kind of aesthetic question it's also
very much an institutional on it but I
mean I grew up with institutional
critique is my like basis for the
determination
in and out and to make the point to
students for instance very important
point when they enter into a course that
they're not it's not like we have any
better aesthetic judgment and they do
and maybe they're kind of interest in
anime is that we could qualify that as a
very profound aesthetic experience
there's no reason and I think that that
opening up has made it the world more
diverse but yet they're still of course
the hierarchy and it is money right it's
blue chip galleries that are making fast
decisions you know Douglas crimps a
really important book on the museum's
ruins ends with that helicopter at MoMA
and right it isn't a little illustration
it's definitely not a moment of high
praise I mean it is like the museum is
in ruins because there is a helicopter a
boma maybe that's very much thought to
fit so I think that these gatekeeping I
mean it's absolute that it art history
is so intertwined with questions of
privilege and money it's intimately so I
see the mic is in to people's hands and
people take those two questions so Mary
you're very eager why not that eager oh
maybe just we should call a shock I just
wanted to follow up on something that ty
was saying which I find very important
and also in our art history department
here which of course is history of art
and visual culture is that manufactured
goods are very much part of visual
culture and especially when you're
dealing with the social history of art
as we are as we're talking about these
things and in talking about the
environment you know we look around and
we see manufactured goods everywhere so
these are very much part of what we
react to especially in consumerist terms
but also in you know just looking around
this room for example you we have innate
aesthetic judgments about manufactured
goods and ours that within our control
are we able to control what these
manufactured goods look like well that's
a good question society controls it but
how thank you yeah there's one more
question you might think thanks so much
uh so
I did a PhD in art history and in
philosophy and kind of at the height of
what Julia was referring to at the
visual turn and so I was constantly
shuttling back and forth between
departments that were in it felt a
little bit like they were at war with
each other and so from the art
historians I was working on aesthetic
value and its relationship to moral
value and so the artist I felt like what
I got from the art historians was a lot
of skepticism about value in general
that I think is really well motivated I
think I understand why people are
skeptical about value things to do with
initially questions pertaining to cannon
formation that are really important
questions to ask but the the effect i
felt like and i still feel like and I
hear a little bit of it in this
conversation is a kind of character of
what's going on in the philosophy of art
and aesthetics as if I mean that so I
you know I'm guess I'm just kind of
putting I want to put in a plug for my
field and for how complex you know
thought about value and about what
constitutes an object of experience like
how complex that is from you know from
Plato all the way to the present and I
feel like you know you get this kind of
as the aesthetics just thinks about the
static object or something and I think
like no it's never been like that
actually and and value has always been
thought of in this really complex way
not just like thumbs up or thumbs down
or something and I just I just want to i
want i want to you know and there
there's certainly problems going the
other way and i feel like you know
there's a lot to criticize about on the
field of aesthetics and and the kinds of
things that we haven't taken account of
yet but I just I just wanted and I think
it it's the point of this conference in
a way to get us talking to each other
and so on I'm just trying to kind of
push back from the other side a little
bit there I think they all were
appreciating how
how the conversation yeah we need to
have more texture and new ones yes and I
hope you know that well I'll just speak
you you don't know that I do think I
think we weren't we were in some ways we
were caricature yes art historical um
understanding without owning and
necessarily so I do feel really excited
to be here and part of these more subtle
dialogues i mean i think that the only
thing is so for having now worked for
many years on sort of design and crafts
objects and artifacts are facts right
things that are not usually qualified as
arch or maybe only recently are coming
into that qualification that I've
actually started to think about in fact
I should I was always thinking about a
set of questions I just think about the
tactility of cloth and how we don't have
a vocabulary same way half fact we don't
have a vocabulary for describing the
very nuanced specificity of that
experience and so I've written about
weavers who were very obsessed with that
topic you know like that the specificity
of that aesthetic experience so I and
it's not to say that that I'm so we've
been caricature in our histories kind of
very maybe now long overdue you know
Carrick you know dismissiveness of
aesthetic experience I guess I just was
the only thing I pushed back when
schools of course we're dealing with all
you know they we don't interact
I'm holding a table at pulling cloth I'm
holding something sami experiences
looking at the sunset I'm still
experiencing something right so I was
just uh and that I mean I I wanted to
say that when we were this is the last
thing else no I challenge eyes when we
when y'all were talking about objects i
was thinking the way that a philosopher
uses object of experience isn't doesn't
have to be a static reified thing it's
just that toward which the experience is
directed which could be a process could
be temporally extended could have very
fluid boundaries and sachets I mean it's
always it's always again through time
has an object flows right back yeah oh
one more very quick ok just to disrupt
the easy easy flow of things there's the
whole movement that that you're
recalling many others are involved with
call the aesthetics in everyday life in
which there's no special object but
anything any not only object but
experienced a situation of phenomenon of
can be experienced aesthetically so that
breaks out of the object framework
entirely mm-hmm great I feel so excited
said have heard the word breeches at
frock coats so thanks to each of you
thank you also to the audience
one announcement for the speakers and
chairs for the President's House dinner
I listed on the map but there is a
shuttle bus going from hampton inn and I
book them for 620 they have to do two
runs so if you are interested in taking
that shuttle
