okay so welcome welcome to an thanks
coming to critical design critical
futures 1 i'm damian whitehead of
history philosophy social science at
RISD and this is Ian Goucher school of
engineering at Brown University and
we're delighted to welcome you to this
event we've got a very exciting day
ahead of us and a great way of speakers
and panels and I just like to set up our
event today just by thinking about why
we're doing this and why critical design
critical futures so let me just give you
a little backdrop and contextualization
this discussion at RISD and between RISD
and brown really emerged and was
triggered in the first instance by the
bangladesh garment workers factory fire
that occurred on november 24 2012 in
Dakar at the nazarene fashion factory
which as many of you will know left the
hundred and seventeen workers dead and
200 injured and it was the worst factory
fire in very long time worst in in the
history of Bangladesh but quite quickly
after that it was reported by the New
York Times that Walmart had played a
very significant role in blocking
reforms to improve conditions in the
factory prior to the event on account of
cost subsequent to this a year later you
will be well aware that there was a
major building collapse in another
industrial accident of garment workers
where 1,100 garment workers died in a
smaller town in Bangladesh and it was
the worst industrial accident in living
memory it was interesting and important
for us as commuted dress and not simply
because of the obvious humanitarian
questions but because these institutions
were intimate
be entangled in a an economy of design
in a political economy of design which
our institution is intimately related to
this is the creative economy or one
particular side of this so about three
months later we had a very productive
and important series of events where
Richard Locke from the Watson Institute
came down to RISD and we had an
excellent discussion between apparel
textiles history philosophy social
science industrial design and faculty at
Brown and the the discussion in the
first incidence was triggered by this
humanitarian disaster andum and thinking
about the nature of our design economy
our global design economy but quite
quickly it started to expand beyond that
discussion and it started to expand into
the question of global climate change
and expanding inequality it started to
expand into questions of our homegrown
design economy and the extent to which
that might actually involve a great deal
of hidden levels of exploitation through
internship culture precarious employment
and so on more generally we were
thinking about and discussing questions
of of the purposes of of contemporary
design and the extent to which you know
if we are honest if things continue as
they are you know are we essentially
involved for a large part of our time in
a kind of landfill studies could it be
the case that this is what we should
rebrand conventional design in large
part and obviously leads to certain
fundamental questions which an
institution concern with design and it's
allied partner up up the road should be
asking itself persistently is this the
kind of future
that we are anticipating if design is
all about futuring if design is about
prefiguring if design is about
anticipating the unexpected then is this
the future we are heading towards I'll
be planning on this more generally is
this the kind of design that we want to
bring into being is this the great
genius of design thinking is this your
professional legacy this is what you're
going to spend your life ultimately
doing it's a good question to ask
students so where does this take us well
obviously many of you will be aware that
the history of design is vast and
complicated and rich and plural and
there have been many moments in the
history of design where dissenting
moments dissenting currents dissenting
visions of other futures have erupted
and become possible often sustained by
different kinds of social movements
which have come and gone but the
question then can be posed you know
where are we now and how do we think
about futuring how do we think about
design how do we think about impossible
futures in the light of this now many of
my colleagues in liberal arts we're
interested in these questions
particularly because it was our sense
that many of the dilemmas and questions
that design is grappling with are
actually becoming coinciding with
discussions and debates that are going
on elsewhere and that there's a really
interesting possibility for new lines of
engagement and a new horizons of of
thinking about design in different ways
so obviously the Richard Locke
experience Richard being particularly
concerned with tracking commodity supply
chains global supply chains and posed us
to to or pressed us to to question and
to raise the question you know is it is
it always optimal to think about
designing object centered ways an object
centered materialism or maybe other
virtues and advantages in situating
material
products in social historical and
ecological relationships and flows and
could it be the case that if we situate
these things in historical ecological
relationships and flows we can start to
see that design is inherently political
that our designed world is a material
well it's a maid world and there are
political choices involved in the
Constitution of that world so that's an
interesting kind of initial moment that
many of us came to quite quickly
engaging with Richard Locke and the
watson center but more generally it was
observed that if you actually look
around the intellectual landscape more
broadly you can see that many other
parts of the Academy are coming to the
notion that it is perhaps advantageous
now to recognize the extent to which our
worlds or socio material worlds or
socio-ecological worlds are
systematically designed all the way up
and all the way down now this idea
initially was very prominent in some
kind of critically important thinkers in
science and technology studies donna
haraway bruno latour pioneering the the
tangled meshes of humans animals
technologies and stuff that seemed to
they suggested in the 80s and 90s be a
definitive aspect of our modern
experience but these are often radical
sometimes fringe thinkers and
interestingly have been them and drawn
together in much broader debates going
on in the Natural Sciences now so if we
look at the Natural Sciences and we look
at debates recent debates in ecology
climate science Earth System science
particularly around the Anthropocene the
very proposition now that we live in a
world which has been comprehensively
altered at every level by human agency
is becoming widely recognized as a
useful way to think about where we are
his the work of early Ellis the
geographer
just who Maps the anthropocentric
transformation of the biosphere and
basically demonstrates through a whole
set of gorgeous maps there's really not
much left that can be seen in any way as
untouched if we look at the work of will
Stefan and the stock own resilience
Institute and similar arguments are
being made particularly in relation to
the the increase in the material
throughput of all manner of socio
material processes social ecological
processes particularly since the 1950s
this is referred to by the environmental
historian john mcneill as the great
acceleration of vast acceleration in the
material intensity of our transformation
of nature's so welcome to the
Anthropocene is is a is a theme that is
emerging in the Natural Sciences the
anthro sku Minh seen replicating the
idea that we might have moved beyond the
geological epoch of the Holocene towards
one where humans have become a
geological force on the planet every bit
as comparable to plate tectonics or
other such forces but it's interesting
that if we look more broadly in the
Academy we can see very similar
arguments emerging so if we take chem
urban studies in geography now we look
at the work of Neil Brenner and Neal
Brennan arguing that um we currently are
situated now in in a context of
planetary urbanism the city is expanded
well beyond conventional urban forms and
in fact urban flows are are
progressively urbanizing the rest of the
planet here's a map of Brazil and the
Amazon and Brenner is trying to track
the ways in which the Amazon itself is
becoming urbanized is becoming urbanized
to the spread of infrastructure through
what were previously wildernesses and
the the need energy resource demands of
the urban hubs that it is feeding at the
same time there's some really amazing
work going on in historical ecology
historical anthropology which is
basically suggesting that planetary
urbanism actually may have been going on
for much much longer than we previously
thought so a whole body of work has
emerged they would last 15-20 years
which is comprehensively transformed our
understanding of the Americas
particularly the pre-columbian Americas
in terms of population rates in terms of
levels of landscape and ecosystem
transformations it seems to be the case
that indigenous people's gardens
transformed metabolized comprehensively
with nature for millennia well before
Europeans turned up and here's an
example again going back to the Amazon
it's speculated now by Clark Erickson
that about twelve percent of the non
flooded amazon forest is of
anthropogenic original that large chunks
in amazon were gardened by millennia by
indigenous people often building fish
Weir's and other such earth structures
to meet their needs and there's some
really fantastic stuff from emerging
about earlier urbanization of the Amazon
have a look at Charles see man 1493 for
a nice popularization of that so we're
getting a sense not just other designed
economy now but not a notion that across
space and time this has been going on
for quite some time so what is what does
this bring into being in terms of
thinking about design thinking about
politics thinking about futures thinking
about the social sciences well let me
just finish with a few questions that
hopefully might kind of percolate
through these thoughts but also
percolate through today clearly and the
question that needs to be asked in terms
of our designed world or design economy
the the current practice of design is
whose interests does this current design
well observe and who's Anthropocene is
being constructed yeah who's the an
throws and who's part of the
conversation in constructing this vast
designed biosphere now
who and what is brought interview in
this designed economy who has voice and
who is silenced or who continues to be
silenced a second set of questions and
that relate to know the question of
designers in this economy relate to the
question of if we're living in a
creative economy a so-called creative
economy you know or would it be useful
not to simply see designers as users but
maybe designers as workers and often
embodied in very problematic working
conditions and contexts more generally
could it be the case that design is
about prefiguring anticipating and and
creating new possibilities could it be
that the old term workers could be
designers could it be that in many
realms of life now working people could
design their own lives their own
contexts their own spheres to a much
greater extent and so we'll have a
little panel about that later I'm
thinking about something called worker
centered design and but there's other
really interesting developments going on
in in the field in fields more generally
so design futuring is returning quite
extensively to design by many different
directions we have Susan yella [ __ ]
here today which will spit fuel sweet
later so in wonderful book called design
as future making and the shelves are
getting heavy on the topic but hers is
certainly a premier collection isn't
that so yes well the same time in the
critical social sciences after a long
period of post-structuralist and
postmodern malaise where everything had
to be kept open and suddenly people are
suggesting that you know pre figurative
designs pre figurative institutional
alternatives need to be present for us
to have a political debate the old
post-structuralist argument was keep it
all open and we'll have a political
debate and then we started to realize
that if you have no institutional
arguments to propose that you don't have
any debate similarly in design more
generally there's been currents emerging
and
thinking about designers are form social
activism could which runs through all
manner of designed social movement
activities from tactical urbanism to
continued importance of humanitarian
social design etc so this creates in a
terrain of potential engagement a range
of questions that we can ask you know
other other horizons for possibility now
where design and social sciences design
and liberal arts could have a much
richer form of engagement so you know
most obviously we want to think about
you know what kind of design for what
kind of future there's a there's an
interesting question here and more
broadly you know our existing forms of
design and our existing forms of the
social sciences and the critical
sciences are they up to the job are they
up to the job of the challenges that we
have to meet are they up to the job of
thinking seriously about the future more
generally is designed education as
currently configured is it up to the
challenge is it up to the challenge of
the vast job that we have to do and and
and how do we think about developing
those relations in the future is it that
we offer more a design education that's
interdisciplinary that's
multidisciplinary that's
transdisciplinary or is it the case that
design and that the social sciences
designed and Liberal Arts might have to
become something quite different to
address the full range challenges that
we have confronting us so there are a
few little thoughts about design and
it's futures I'll leave it there i'll
just bring in my co-organizer in Gonchar
who will say a few words i think it's
standing behind me prowling behind
Thank You Damian just to follow up on
that great introduction by Damian just a
few quick remarks and then we'll get to
the day's events what role can and
should designers play and envisioning
and actualize in the world's tomorrow
this question broadly speaking will be
our point of departure for today's
conversations we will ask is design a
valid means of cultural critique and
social activism can critical design
actually produce a critical future we
will also examine the limits of what
critical design can and should do we'll
explore design not only as a means of
facilitating the needs and wants of the
user that is usually the consumer but
also expanding this role to include the
experience of workers and others who
produce the manufactured objects that
make up our material culture we will
finish the day with a discussion about
how design theory and practice might
reorient us towards new pedagogies in
the art of teaching design today we hope
is the beginning or continuation of a
much longer conversation that will take
us into the future not just the future
of the world and it's seven billion plus
inhabitants but also develop
opportunities for more collaboration
between designers artists activists and
scholars at Brown RISD and beyond the
idea that design can produce a better
experience for everyone is one that is
worthy of our attention today's events
could not have happened if not for the
efforts of many people at both r is diem
brown day me and i would like to thank
faculty and administrators at both
schools who have supported this
collaboration in these discussions from
the beginning and tape the big thanks to
an for helping organize all this pradeep
sharma brian goldberg richard Fishman
the brown was the collaborative grant
the two 250 fund rick lock in the Watson
Institute Janine Conley and academic
affairs Brian Clark Chris Swift kerosene
Marcellus Stroud and mica Barrett at
RISD media who helped us with the
website the RISD brown critical design
research initiative and many many others
who have supported this ongoing
conversation we hope it's a conversation
that we can continue with you as well
please visit our website cdcs org for
articles galleries and videos including
a rebroadcast of today's events we will
continue to post content to the website
in the months ahead and also remember
stick around this weekend for
other hands widening the conversation
about design on college college hill
there are some great talks at the seed
conference as well as the architecture
urbanism and humanity symposium
including a keynote lecture tonight at
six-thirty by bernard tschumi more
information can be found on their
website the seed website is sea org and
seed is with 3 e's and the brown rizzi
symposium com and with that I'd like to
hand it over to Charlie cannon who will
be moderating our first panel thank you
