hi um I have a couple questions for
Marissa I wanted to get your thoughts on
sort of surveillance and reality TV and
how it has how what your thoughts are on
the effects of the of that as a
participant and the effects on
participants as well as a people as
viewers and sort of how to navigate this
sort of third foyer that's present their
case it more about what you're thinking
about the third lawyer well it's like
it's different from surveillance systems
that were sort of a degraded into as
citizens it's like a form of
entertainment but it's also a form of
sort of like self-reflection no way yeah
reality TV like specifically mm-hmm I am
really interested in reality TV actually
um after i audition for American Idol I
made a video that was a fictional
reenactment of my audition I'm cutting
together footage from the show and
recordings of me pretending to audition
in a studio environment and I was even
just interested in the different genre
conventions of reality TV so I mean
literally very formally so for instance
television is known for having
approximately twice the number of cuts
as film and reality TV is known for
having double the number of cuts of
other TV and so that's something that I
integrated into my piece and I'm also
very interested in surveillance as an
issue I've taught classes on
surveillance and two valence or the term
that some people use to refer to kind of
counter surveilling or surveilling from
below um but I think that you know I
find myself being interested
in kind of parrot what I see is a
paradox between people not wanting to be
seen and wanting to be seen and I think
that certainly within our culture and as
was reflected kind of in my high school
poetry you know there's this idea of
like I want to be heard I want to be
seen and that phrase being seeing itself
is kind of the phrase that refers to
being validated or recognized or
acknowledged in some way that we all
kind of seem to need but at the same
time we don't want to be you know spied
on so that is a thing that I think is
very interesting in this cultural moment
of Instagram and social media and things
like that but sorry I'm probably talking
to Linda I have another question about
blogs and sort of where do you think the
form of the blog lives today is is it
still relevant as a format of writing
has it failed in anyways has it
succeeded instead of what are the
differences between writers who are so
what are your hopes and expectations of
writers who have kind of had that format
available to them generationally and how
that's different from previous writers
who've had sort of personal Diaries and
that being published sort of like
there's an intrinsic relationship to
that style of writing that's like
immediately public and how your thoughts
on how that kind of changes how you
write and how you think people right
good questions and I actually did a net
art piece with a collaborator that was
commissioned by the Whitney called a
band mousing the blogs and we actually
made a blog this was in 2006 we made a
blog that kind of reblogged some of our
favorite posts from bizarre blogs like
one was called a heat horses and it was
just a super super long post just saying
over and over i hate horses and
then we sang them and we called the blog
a mixed
and each post was considered a track and
we were thinking about the genre
conventions of blogs and the idea that
blogs at the time we're starting to be
referred to as the voice of the people
in the same way that other forms of
journalism or citizen journalism used to
be I think now arguably it the novelty
is sort of gone and we may often look at
things that are we may not even realize
our blogs and some of it is about a
technological structure like having
being cereal or having an RSS feed or a
permalink that's separate from the main
page but I think that it's become such a
dominant form for publishing that and
certainly we've seen a lot of
paper-based publications die or and/or
kind of migrate to blogs that now I
don't even know that there's necessarily
such a distinction anymore between blogs
and other things I'll just say one last
thing I was thinking as you were
presenting that I had this conversation
with a friend recently who pointed out
to me that once upon a time typing was a
really common profession and people
would take classes to do it and they
would refer to themselves as typists and
there were some people who could type
and some people who couldn't type or
couldn't type very well and now we're
just kind of all typists right like
we're always typing and we kind of don't
necessarily distinguish anymore between
the activity of typing and the activity
of writing or communicating or whatever
and I think that that's kind of true for
me do a lot of us in terms of the way
that writing infiltrates are larger
practices
you guys hear me could I want to build
on that for a second because I think
it's interesting because while we are
typing a lot and it feels like writing
there is also I think a lot of set I say
this in triangulation at one point that
we it seems like we're moving more
towards an oral a sort of society that's
like an oral culture rather than a
written culture and I find it really
interesting that we're having panels
like this where we're really interested
in writing because it feels like somehow
the act of writing has like been
co-opted by the act of speaking which is
really the act of typing so there's like
this kind of this kind of like
interesting circular moment right now
where we're not sure what we mean by
those different at those different verbs
and yeah I don't know what that means
but it's just an observation
I think it's work I think it's on um it
makes me think of the quip I think it
was about when Kerouac wrote on the road
I forget who criticized it but that's
not writing it's typewriting but then
also just a personal footnote when I
when I got out of art school I didn't
have any skills like I thought well if I
have an MFA I'll be okay which
eventually I was but I needed some money
to tie me over so I worked as a as a
temp and with the new skill of word
processing and it was a time when word
processing machines were these big
standalone things and the one I used was
a by deck which looked like a Star Trek
kind of thing like a desk that
surrounded you and under really jobs i
would go into say a law firm and they
say our word processing technician has
arrived and nobody really knew where to
situate the skill and you know and that
as personal computers came on the market
it became a universal skill but it was
monetizable at one point hi um I have a
question for mr. Miller I oh yeah um you
mentioned your work with personal ads
they get made and i recently read your
essay about that work and you you talk
about Veblen 'he's a definition of
aesthetics as that which exceeds pure
function and i was wondering if you
think about that definition in terms of
your own writing on art or on your own
writing at all because you seem to be
very interested in sort of the
aesthetics of certain types of writing
and I wonder if you sort of think about
that when you're writing about are
generally it's funny I never thought of
it that way but I can I can see where
you're going that if and it's funny even
in texts that aren't supposed to be
aesthetic I i try to crap them so that
they have in us that
quality and it's funny I thought of
something I can nearly kind of Rob's
readings where there's a kind of I often
think of writing in opposition to like
the discourse that's made evident in
panels we're writing can be this kind of
private experience where you can control
everything and for me it's like it's
kind of like the opportunity to come up
with a line or an answer that I'd be too
slow to get in real life but since I
have like all the time in the world to
write I can construct it but then that
also becomes like the fantasy element of
writing and that so what I strive for is
a kind of economical and simple style
that's also aesthetically pleasing and
and that can help convince your readers
to agree with you I mean there's like a
kind of vested interest in that but also
for me it's very much bound to the
pleasure of writing so it's there's like
a on the one hand you're often making an
argument but there's like this fantasy
sidebar because there's no other voices
of intervening and contradicting what
you have to say so how to take all that
back to Dublin and the idea of excess
who I always opposed Dublin to in my
mind I'm blanking out but but Dublin was
basically puritanical and I think there
was a truth to his kind of puritanical
criticism of excess and I suppose the
exact opposite maybe this is what I
count
poses on the Frankfurt School critique
of instrumentalization that would be
like the other side of the coin you know
so for Veblen anything that wasn't
strictly functional was invidious that's
the term he liked to use that would show
that someone has the capacity to waste
that another person doesn't so the
person who has like that aesthetic
capacity to waste lays claim to a kind
of a superior position in the social and
cultural hierarchy the Frankfurt School
tweets that entirely differently that
you know say adorno maybe
paradigmatically looks for non
instrumentalization that something that
can't be integrated into a capitalist
system is valuable because it stands
outside the system we are writing falls
and all of that and I'm not exactly sure
why maybe because I tend to think of
writing as less having to do with like a
kind of sumptuous display but I think
you're nonetheless on to something
because they to get the aesthetic effect
it requires extra effort and it is a
kind of luxury so it's a question of how
to evaluate so that's a very non
definitive answer and maybe I'm just
like repeating the terms of your
question no no this great things it was
a pretty open-ended question but but
yeah I think it's a good point I mean to
come out of maybe another way and maybe
to tie it to the question about blogging
I think you know we I feel like when a
lot of when a lot of like long-form
writing which was not thought of then it
was just simply thought it was right but
when a lot of that type of writing was
produced I think the different the
private-public dial was slightly more
towards private
we maybe have dialed it more towards
public and so what's different about
blogging then then what I would describe
is I guess writing for myself is is
access to the development of the pros
and I think that moment that you're
talking about where the pros has been
prepared and then it is released that's
like a very that's a moment to savor I
think as a writer and maybe one that
like blogging doesn't always offer but
it offers something different it offers
a kind of a kind of extended public
moment for the writer so I think I think
there's like there's value to both but I
think in the same way that people talk
about films a director's medium and
television as a writer's medium i wonder
if like vlogging is in an audience this
medium so i might just say also a
personal footnote and i like the Easter
a writing word describe an anecdote and
when I was keeping that American Idol
book and so many people were looking at
it it was so fascinating and also when I
posted my audition video on YouTube and
it got like tens of thousands of hits
before they took it down for copyright
violation without telling me and it was
so interesting the tone of people's
comments on the video and on the blog
they very much I felt were kind of
channeling Simon Cowell as this like
scowly voice you know like what one of
my favorite comments on the video was a
fat piece of beef the eaf and you know
there were other ones like number one
can't sing number two ugly you know I
never none of which I ever deleted I
felt like they were also part of the
medium and and that something really
interesting was happening in terms of
the way that a reality TV specifically
Simon Cowell but reality TV i would say
more generally was affecting people's
voices and i would say that in a sense
to come back to your question I would
say that maybe blogs are like the new
reality to you
II but I think that I want to stop shy
of saying that the internet is almost
two Democratic in terms of like anyone
can write and anyone can say anything
and maybe they aren't putting as much
time we're thought into it that's kind
of like it's terrible interpretation of
the internet and democracy but um but
sometimes it feels that way well I think
there's an anti-democratic aspect to the
internet too and and into all networks
it it's not absolute but yeah you can
look at like the first network Roman
roads and that was used to build an
empire so networks served to monopolize
and consolidate power and even though
anyone can post something online there's
there's still a hierarchy and and I
think we have to look at how information
is received and I think 11 model that's
still helpful is Herbert marcos's notion
of repressive tolerance that it's more
effective rather than to censor
something just to let a lot of
information out into the system and you
know and that's predicated on the idea
that there's a surplus of information
the people can't absorb it all and you
know the DISA dissident information will
simply get lost among other other
messages
I guess I'll ask this to all three of
you but why are your thoughts on kind of
being oversaturated with media and you
know like why are you so your personal
feelings of being sort of inundated with
with lots of information constantly and
like what how has that become sort of
like a value today like is it sort of a
character trait now that you can handle
like 10,000 feeds in the morning and
also like catch up on all the TV shows
and you know they're sort of this
reverse reaction now that like of like
younger people going to farms and like
finding silence but like to me part of
me feels like is that like a sign of
weakness like things aren't going to
slow down so why retreat like and I'm
bicurious as like just how to deal with
that I personally hear people complain
about the idea of information overload
all the time but it doesn't bother me at
all i love it and i can choose not to
read the 10,000 feeds or watch orange is
the new black pepper and although i
frequently choose to just constantly
consume media but that's a choice and
but i'm interested in the presence of
that conversation and the history of
that conversation you know a lot of it
used to come in the form of like talking
about the city and the impact of the
city and still now i always love when
though these interesting studies that
will come out about like a new york city
has X number of decibels compared to
other cities and it's having this
tangible effect on people's health and
psychology and things like that there's
also the concept of decision fatigue
that apparently all library studies
students learn about that it's just so
overwhelming to decide you know which
shelf to be putting which book on all
the time
am or what words to pluck from a
taxonomy that you can get a headache and
but I don't I don't know I feel like
information overload is like I don't
know I feel like you would know the
history of that term somehow but it just
feels like it's this like just problem
that's described as a problem for the
idea of complaining about something but
it doesn't bother me I don't know I I I
agree with all saw what you said and I
think that I think that it is it's a
kind of new term for an old problem and
I think that uh I almost read something
from the essay about Ulrika Beck who is
a sociologist that passed away while i
was in Rome but I did a lot of thing
about him i was there i think he for me
he unlocks a lot of these questions
through a argument he calls
individualization which is essentially
that as information increases within a
system it becomes people have more
anxiety about how to individualize
themselves because more is known and so
essentially the the retreating becomes a
way to individualize like the the
claiming of over simulation becomes a
way to identify oneself I do think that
it's a choice and I find myself less
overwhelmed by knowing that so I totally
agree yeah for me it's not so much of
matter of retreating because I haven't
gone out that much i got i don't use
social media and just soak my my work as
a teacher i'm always fielding a lot of
emails and but when i do go out it's
more for researching something and then
you know i think of how i used to
research things and you know it used to
be such a long process now research can
happen in such an efficient manner so
yeah that's that's more or less my
relationship to it in it it's not it's
not that I'm a Luddite but I just
engaged technology in specific ways and
then in
other way is not
ok
I teach too
where
see I really just think its age like I
I'm sorry to say that that might be
really like really like too simplistic
but I really like I feel less concerned
about it as i get older and I can feel
tangibly that calming down for me
because I am NOT interested in
everything anymore you know i'm
interested in the things I'm interested
in and my identity's is his firmer than
it was when i was in school and so i
think it's i don't want to say it's like
a young person's problem i think it's
any person's problem that is developing
an identity you know in an end of way of
working
I mean I would just I think you the
answers in your question I would just be
far less normative about it you know
like I don't think that there's only one
way to write clearly and like there's
not only one way to be a designer and
artists or anything either so just don't
be normative about it especially if
you're teaching in a creative context I
teach at Barnard College which is a
women's college and the visual arts
concentration is within the art history
department so I find there that this
almost all the students are amazingly
good writers and so I I don't see you
know in that school I don't see any
correlation between writing skills or
lack thereof and online media they
sometimes I'll have a quiet student who
you know I think isn't doing anything
then she turns in her paper and I feel
like I didn't know the gun was loaded or
something but it's School of Visual Arts
example which has a kind of
anti-intellectual climate there I dread
having to look at artist statements
there it's just horrible and and just a
you know the basic ability even if like
the idea behind it is interesting it the
form it comes out in a Cell muddled and
unformed it can be really frustrating
but yeah so I think it you know based on
my teaching in two places I see it more
in terms of like who the students are
rather than what the state of Technology
is right now and then to go to your
other question i'm happy i grew up when
I did because a lot of what fed into my
art making impulse was just playing in
the woods
and not dealing with any which may sound
kind of romantic or something but it was
just you know that's what my childhood
was likely had a woods in the back of
our house I wasn't dealing with it
electronic media may be watched a little
bit of TV but you know is more
interesting to be outside and to do
stuff outside I was really quickly um to
that to both of your questions the
question as to what we had before the
internet I think for me the the example
is just channel surfing on television um
I grew up doing quite a bit of that and
the remote control I would say I had a
defining role in my life um but uh yeah
sorry i just got lost thinking about
whether google is the new remote control
you talk about that later um but anyway
um I think that in terms of the teaching
thing to me the what feels like the
obvious answer is that the way to teach
writing is by having the students do a
lot of reading and close reading for me
that's that's what it was it was being
raised in an undergrad environment but i
mentioned that i went to a rhetoric
department and so it was really about
very very close reading something i had
to learn to become comfortable with as a
professor was the concept of silence and
not always having to fill the moment or
the void with words but actually just
sit and read and look and think really
closely about text and then the other
thing was learning to kind of use one
type of text to close read another text
like a Freud essay to read a Hitchcock
film or something like that was yeah
something that really helped me think a
lot about language and how to use
language
critically I think that's also a
technique that can get to the ideology
behind different sources to this kind of
cross reading yeah so could we we're
going to move to our last and short
phase of the evening here so Brian and
Marissa I just want to jump in as also
as a he was join up on the stage so I
teach in a slightly different context
and I'm a little bit of fish out of
water but I think it's interesting to
think I mean architects I teach in a
school of architecture at Northeastern
University and I teach largely history
theory classes and so my students do a
lot of writing but I'm struck by your
comment that I love that's what I gotta
happening now and I am struck by your
distinction between the Barnard students
in the art students because I still
think that reveals a kind of
differentiation between the students
that is a classically well trained
liberal art student that the papers are
good versus the artists or the arca that
doesn't know how to write and I it's
something and I think also really at
least it northeastern which again is it
is a school that is maybe doesn't have a
strong liberal arts focus I do find that
writing is not integrated in any
meaningful way into our educational
system for our design students and I
think that's partly because they're
marked as design students and so you
don't need to understand that in the
same way that a rhetoric student does or
that an English major does and so you
know one thing i'm also struck recently
those I think there's the sea change in
a kind of pedagogy of also like a
project-based learning sort of system
where that's me also feels a little bit
scary because i think that there's so
much focus at least in my teaching on
constantly we have in workshops on how
to students it's all inquiry-based and
there's no missile idea that you don't
instruct any longer and you don't I'm
not the sage on the stage and it's all
student driven but that also scares me a
little bit and maybe this is just my old
age because it doesn't in terms of
teaching those skills particularly of
writing and making an argument and all
that i'm not sure where we find a place
for that so I don't have an answer to
your question but I feel the same
crisis kind of I guess is what I'm
saying but but one thing I'd like to say
at least within the art world I I don't
think that there is a presumption of
artist being inarticulate anymore I
think rather there's a sense even if
there's not like a literal text involved
that that an artwork is something that's
part of a discourse so there's a textual
implication and I I think most artists
are aware of that even if they don't you
know produce text per se and then when
it comes I think this is one of the
prompts that was given but when it comes
to like well how does how does writing
function visa vie and our career or
something like that I I have a friend
who's an artist from Argentina although
he's been in New York for many years
Nick kwanini who who writes but he's
also has quite a cynical view and he
says like well writings like an
insurance policy like you can have a
couple bad seasons but if you're writing
you can still like keep yourself a flood
so that's not so much my view I was
struck by nick's kind of cynical
pragmatism yeah it's interesting i've
been teaching writing here at RISD for
about 10 years and i have always kind of
subtly i hope encourage students to
write because it would engender a kind
of agency for them out in the world and
marisa hearing your story about post
internet and the kind of you know the
kind of strain that the term has created
and I hadn't thought about Carolyn and
the term happenings in that same way
that you know it also has its dangers
you know it's John in the in the
introduction to your collected writings
Mike Kelly wrote about the kind of
threat to the artist in being
mute in sort of taking that stance that
forced mutinous and how it was so
important to kind of claim the discourse
in order to set the terms that were real
and true and not the ones that critics
were imposing right but even when you do
and when you kind of coin a term that
has so much currency now I mean I think
the response to that term has everything
to do that with the fact that it has
traveled the universe in the way that it
has right it may be never would have 20
30 40 years ago and you could have said
it would have been a simple story and
just mention anecdotally that sometimes
when i teach probably at least one day
every semester if not more i will start
a class by just saying okay um for the
first ten minutes of class we're just
going to write and it doesn't really
matter what what class it is it's just
I'll just ask people to write and I'll
ask them to write with paper and a
writing implement and it makes them so
angry for one thing they're like and
then they were ten minutes all of a
sudden just feels like the longest time
to them and there's also this funny a
couple of their funny things that will
happen which is that often it's like
there's only one or maybe two students
in the classroom you even have paper or
a pen and they're always like loaning it
out to other students and then it's
funny to like see them going like this
actually the first minute because you
know they're not like me they didn't
grow up with the middle finger callous
you know from holding the pencil they're
just they're typists so it's interesting
to just think about writing itself in
the classroom too but but I can kind of
sympathize with your students like I
find when I write like writing the first
draft is really painful like I like I
don't like
down and relish that at all it's like
it's I find it really arduous and then
going back and kind of refining like
that's more fun but getting like the
initial set of ideas out it's kind of
torturous for me at least that's at last
time I was here I talked a little bit
about this but like the kind of not
having that moment when you sit down to
write and that kind of but like trying
to be writing continuously so I feel
like if you're sitting in a lecture back
that is that not writing like or if
you're like if you're taking notes and
responding and and stuff or if you're
like if you're just walking around like
sometimes I will just take like an audio
note i will just like be like thinking
about this and thinking about this and
i'll just like free associate I feel
like generating text just for me like I
found a lot of anxiety around that
moment where you're like I have to now
start and so if it's like sort of like
dissolving them
