morning so I'm going to very briefly
introduce what what this first panel
will be up to this morning and hopefully
not do it by giving away all of the the
good tidbits so so this first panel is
invited to talk about both critical
design and critical futures right to
look at the the promise that Ian and
Damian have outlined in their in their
morning's presentations about what kind
of balance needed there be for a
successful speculative work to
critically evaluate what is and for
successful engaged work to help us drive
towards new futures that panel our panel
will is compromised or as compromised
will be compromised by many speakers who
include pilot my colleague here in
industrial design Paolo Cardini
Susan yell of achaz Damian noted an
author or an editor of the now I
forgotten the name of the book designs
futuring and also the director of design
studies at Parsons The New School for
Design and Cameron Tonkin wise who is
the director of design studies at
Carnegie Mellon University where we will
and our we will ask and are being asked
to examine and discuss questions about
the role of critical design its
limitations and the implications of
critical design or post critical design
practices for both education and for
professional practice that's really all
I need to say what I'm going to do is
invite I think I'd like to actually
invite everybody to come on up Susan
yellow vitual will introduce us to a
kind of a longer view and a more
detailed understanding of critical
design its historical antecedents and
and then help us turn the con
/ sation towards design fictions which
Paulo Cardini will then take up and then
we'll move through some nonfiction
exercises that I'm going to offer and
then Cameron will take us home or at
least into the future okay hi nice to
see you thank you Charlie
a disclaimer that I may not need to make
but I'm not a designer if I make
anything I do it with words and that's
my craft so my first instinct after
accepting Ian and Damian's generous
invitation to be here with y'all was to
parse out the dynamics of critical
design so I'm going on the assumption
that it is a body of work of very
diverse manifestations but of course
it's useful to be reminded that it's
still pretty marginal that you know
Damian's talk made me think that what
we're dealing with here is still
something that is a counter force to the
mainstream conventional design practice
nonetheless what I'm gonna do is parse
it out conversations provocations
occasions and debates I'm gonna try to
put some flesh on those words as it were
by looking at certain practices and then
I'm going to turn the tables from design
fiction to fiction design in the hopes
of offering not a better or superior in
any way methodology but a different
approach to the same matter criticality
of course the phrase design fiction is
sort of an oxymoron all design no matter
how banal is a proposition it's a
fiction about a different way of doing
things or being with things or being
with each other to my mind design is a
story it starts a story rather but it's
a story played out with things and
places that we share a stage with what
separates the
wheat from the chaff from the Critical
from the conventional in both design and
in fiction is a felicitous combination
of what I would call resonant
unpredictability or alien an alien
phenomena that you've won that you
recognize that is when you're really
lucky enough to encounter it in the
words of f scott Fitzgerald quote the
test of a first-rate intelligence is the
ability to hold two opposed ideas in
mind at the same time such as resonant
unpredictability but if those ideas are
to be of any consequence it's not just
enough to hold them in mind they have to
provoke an ideally they should provoke
action and this is why critical design
so often relies on that odd combination
of empathy and revulsion to effect these
disturbances to act against the inertia
of the routine in our lives let's be
clear the acts and the actions of
critical design are bit bipolar they
operate within design that's the
physician heal thyself variety and they
also work beyond design this is the
catalytic variety which suggests and
triggers interactions more often than
not interactions among people who could
care less about what design is and you
know it may be a fool's errand to parse
out the inside outside you know whether
it's internal to design or externally
looking but I'm going to try to do that
I took a stab at deciding whether the
inside perspective or the outside
perspective was dominant or recessive
and this is a shockingly partial and an
admittedly very Western view of
criticality in the 20th century but I
show it because it's worth remembering
although I didn't know Damian would do
such a masterful job of reminding us
that criticality has a design history
it's the stories that designers and
design historians tell themselves about
design and its protagonists here the
dominant critical impulse is
inward-looking
the names in white and here's another
grossly abbreviated look at critical
design in the young 21st century with
apologies to anybody I'd
now if you buy my color coding it
appears we're doing a little less
navel-gazing however note the practices
that appear in orange
these recognize the integral
relationship between modes of practice
and political outcomes transdisciplinary
design and transition design which my
colleague Cameron will talk about each
in different ways are pushing against
both established conventions of
designing think in word as well as the
social relationships they might expand
on or activate think outward I
especially want to stress the social in
the second half of that formulation
because I think that matters of security
health and pleasure just to name three
loom larger in most people's minds than
any notion of design the work of design
is of course and better than issues like
that but it's poorly understood and
maybe it doesn't even need to be
understood as design but we I think with
all green design does need to bring
something of its own to the collective
table if it's going to walk its talk now
I say walk the talk with one
qualification because there is a kind of
design that has successfully acted as a
go to action without taking part in the
fray historically this was called
propaganda and sometimes it took the
form of posters today it has another
name provocation this seems to be the
point of Michael Burton and Michiko
Anita's project called Republic of
salivation which envisions a future a
future disease in which the government
has forced feeds people to control what
we consume Burton and Nita as most of
you know we're students of Tony Dunne
and Fiona ray B who have generated an
entire school of critical aka
speculative design Damien's show their
book cover and one of his slides now
it's not that this piece isn't
sufficiently provocative I mean it
triggers a gag reflex every time I see
it the problem I have with what-if
scenarios like this one is that they're
really opaque when all you
given is an image which is the way most
of this work comes to us and ultimately
why see it as a distant cousin of the
poster it's why done and maybe it's book
speculative everything had to be written
it depended on the writing operatic
objects like this really need to come
with librettos or they are mute now more
interesting from my point of view are
the ways in which design can be a
catalyst for conversations and not just
with the converted this is the point of
conflict kitchen which as you can see is
it's a fast-food restaurant it only
serves foods of countries that the u.s.
is in conflict with here Venezuela North
Korea and Palestine in contrast to
hypothetical projects like Republic of
salivation conflict kitchen is a real
takeout restaurant in Pittsburgh it's
been around since 2010 eases designed to
bring people together and a
self-proclaimed kind of dmz not to
coerce conversations but to make space
for dissensus not to coerce coming
together in consensus and of course
design for de census has been talked
about by many people and put forward by
Chantal move as a political theorist now
that said even as wonderful as this
project is we're still talking about
consciousness-raising the kind that
prompts a new kind of public politics
but we're not talking direct action that
could take those enact those politics
critical design is also about
instigation instigations defined by
productive performance and I mean
productive quite literally in the next
example Otto von Bush is a self-styled
fashion activist I don't have a picture
here but this is one of his projects he
uses design tactics to make people
independent of the fashion system here
patterns for a t-shirt or customized
with chess moves Knight to c3 produces
an asymmetrical pleat next move next
fold but this isn't just a studio
exercise Otto also works in Istanbul his
wife as an urban planner he's done a
number of projects there and produced
games like the one you see on your right
which is a riff on
monopoly here so not surprisingly games
since they're interactive are
increasingly common strategy of critical
design this one the thing from the
future which I just got at my conference
a couple weeks ago from Stuart candy its
author is described on its website as
designing quote immersive and generative
situations for the public good for
clients and for Kip's my problem is with
the word kicks no matter how open-ended
this is designed to be the thing from
the future is deeply didactic this is
about consciousness-raising not the
politics of confrontation you can
practically smell the piety coming from
the Dedic now I believe there is a place
for heated debates and confrontations
through and by design Chuck dream is a
documentary made by two film students
who created a fake hypermarket think
Kmart in Prague or outside of Prague and
they got designers to produce an equally
fake ad campaign to promote it the
result was part brawl and part
reflection after the crowd learned it's
been duped one elderly man says well at
least it got us outside another one says
so what this is what the government does
to us all the time lie at least these
guides are clever others are seriously
pissed off they've been waiting in the
Sun cruel maybe but honest the debates
between the filmmakers and the designers
which occupy most of the film the
marketers and the debates among the
people and the authors who came to the
grand opening we're anything but fake
now this may seem an unlikely point for
me to suggest that novels can also be a
form of critical design so far I've been
upping the ante from conversation to
confrontation and reading couldn't be a
more solitary peaceful act but where my
interest in fiction and projects like
conflict kitchen and check dream
converge is the possibility of gauging
wider audiences and a broader social
spectrum in those audiences literature
has the ability to come encompass
lifetimes and generations of living with
and among
things in the fabric of the everyday it
is another way of translating the
retrospective into the possible and it
offers answers to what if for example
what if we were only to use one of our
senses in remembrance of things past
Marcel Proust makes his first telephone
call to his grandmother and he describes
the effects of a new technology that
isolates sound saying quote what I held
in this little bell by ear was our
mutual affection I heard her voice for
the first time what if we thought about
war in terms of trash and debris the
poet vis Lavo should voice no writes
quote after every war somebody has to
tied tidy up things won't pick
themselves up after all and she
effectively genders war on the one hand
and the work of cleaning and mending the
city on the other one quote all the
cameras have gone off to other wars now
since I posted a longer essay on fiction
and design on the symposiums website I'm
gonna close with just one example of a
novel that centers around this theme of
conflict in this case mortal conflict
I'm speaking of Orhan tommix novel my
name is red which is ostensibly a
detective story about the murder of a
miniature painter in Ottoman Turkey the
victim was one of a group of artists who
were sequestered by the Sultan to paint
an illustrated manuscript in the western
style the Sultan wanted to be as visible
as the Venetian doges which meant being
painted just like the Venetian doshas
even though this would violate not only
his faith but also the larger collective
ethos of his culture you know the
Renaissance Michelangelo signing stuff
in Turkey it's still anonymous it's a
collective Enterprise to make art the
action takes place in 15th century
Istanbul which rather pointedly sits on
two continents the European Renaissance
is vaunting radical change in the
Ottoman Empire's just beginning to sense
it's losing its grip
not just on power but on the social
imagination against that background and
we reaching well beyond that as you can
see from this image taken
about two years ago my name is read is a
debate about eastern and western values
the debate about modernity and it's one
that's conducted through form where
arguments are made by things as well as
characters or as well as people who are
characters a Turkish tree actually a
sketch of a treatment to be part of a
manuscript says he feels lost because
he's not part of a story but he also
admits his vanity stroked when he's
stared at by infidels who admire him as
a singular tree conversely a horse drawn
in the Turkish style is aggrieved that
all horses appear as if traced with an
identical stencil 20 times back-to-back
venting his scorn for the feminized East
the horse castigates Turkish miniatures
as ladies who never leave the studio and
never really look at real horses and
then there's the counterfeit coin
circulating in Turkey but made in Venice
who draws attention to the hypocrisy of
the West scorn for the copy over the
original the coin doesn't care much if
he's real or fake he's having a good
time moving through pockets no matter
where he is in the world the trees
ambivalence the horses self-hatred the
coins duality are all surrogates for
social responses to different ideas of
modernity expressed as continuity or
rupture or cosmopolitan hybrid of both
this is my favorite cosmopolitan hybrid
it's so so perfect it's almost corny the
Turkish tea glass in the Western
cylinder 6th century it may seem sort of
these debates are conducted six
centuries ago but they are obviously
quite relevant today given that much of
the horrific violence you seen your
television sets every night flows from
this debate about what's modern whose
modern what the tradition wears values
and how they are expressed my name and
read reveals the way in which tribal
national and religious conflicts and
compromises have their own aesthetic
dimensions involving every sense and are
therefore a matter of and for designed
to address critically and perhaps
intervene not to solve crimes
Tomic doesn't solve anything in the
book but to perhaps force to unravel
motives and to forestall the acts of
violence small and large that continue
to be inflicted on us and on the world
so with that little provocation I'm
going to take a take end and and
introduce Paulo okay so I guess my role
here is to down the level of theory and
bring you into practice and and I'll try
to do that presenting some projects and
that I've done and my students developed
and even to give you an overview about
what is going on here at RISD about this
topic so starting with with with the
assumption that that all we we are
approaching today or part of what we are
speaking today is about critical
fictional speculative design this looks
clear the connection between design and
future or at least the the part of
design that analyzed these possible
plausible futures so I want to introduce
you to different examples
assuming actually the fact that what we
are speaking about is just present and
not future and why is important to
consider all these practices as present
practices and I will use the objective
present in in different ways to try to
explain this concept so present as
actual present as local present as
relevant and present as physical so to
try to describe the design scenario we
are trying to uh know
so let's start with the first one so why
critical speculative or even fictional
design is strongly present because is
actual speaks about in general speaks
about not about futures speaks about
alternative realities so every single
project is about an alternate in a
different point of view on the on the
actual reality this is a project from
erasure on I think is here and and I
wanted to show this little video just to
let you understand what I mean
in order to motivate more customers to
participate to introduce a reward system
every time a product is purchased the
skin
what are they standing
okay okay so this was actually part of
the studio class that me and Charlie
told last semester about discursive and
experimental design well this is another
project again I mean this is a taxidermy
kit too to keep your devices or your
object alive so again these two little
projects are speaking about alternative
realities they are not speaking about
futures even though they are fictional
but the the grade of fiction that is
involved here is is is not really
defined so they are metafictional object
I want to say so they speaks about
something that is not existing yet but
it's absolutely plausible and is
strictly connected with the present so
with who we are now and which one are
the the problems we are prompting right
now present as as local so I personally
don't believe that design can solve
everything and can really be the
solution for everything I'm much more
focused on the fact that design can
solve local problems with with adult
solution and this is the same for for
critical design and and design fictions
this is a project I'm developing now and
this is the project about counterfeit
markets and and Italy I'm working with
with marble and leather master artisans
to to create products that belongs to
the global stereotype scene so in this
way they are fictional objects but at
the same time they are real and most of
all they are contextualized so they are
developed for a specific purpose in a
specific time and in a specific place or
this beautiful project from Cristina the
meadow Afrin outs so speaks about
a space program in in Zambia that they
launched in 1964 after they reach the
independence and it's very poetic and
and and beautiful and and if through
friction is it is about you underline
and express how dreams are important and
how actually a political propaganda in
that in that case was active and again
is a super local and and specific
project present as relevant so any
project need to be present in in values
I mean critical design is strictly
connected obviously with with values and
we had a very nice presentation a few
days ago about sustainable design and
there was a video about bill McDonough
from cradle to cradle and he was
describing the design process and made
by different staffs that are metrics
tactics tactics strategies and goals and
and rarely the design process arrived to
principle and values that are at the top
of the list so he was telling us about
the fact that with with the cradle to
cradle approach or sustainable approach
the process is inverted so we we should
try to start from values and principles
to arrive then to gold strategies
tactics and metrics what I think design
fiction and critical design in general
try to do is exactly that so reverting
the the factors in the design process
and trying to start from values or at
least you do is starting from values and
principle to start the design process
and without really worrying too much
about what what the methods and and and
the strategies are at least at the
beginning these are two project I
developed when I was living in Middle
East with local students and and they
are relevant for them again they are
lever relevant in that specific place
and they are very important now for them
so they both speak about speaks about
religion the first one is on on the left
on the left is a praying mat that is an
machine that the more the most you pray
the most you are able to produce rosary
to pray so it's transforming that the
the the religion in a kind of job and
you are producing praying and you are
producing something that is useful to
pray so it's a never-ending cycle or the
other one is a is a human hair scarf so
to challenge the limits of religion so I
need to cover my hair what about if the
the hair scarf I used is made by hair so
they are questions that the students the
students were not pushed to do this
project
they just feel the need to use design to
be critical about their own society or
this was one of my old project like
three years ago and this project was
speaking about multitasking and mono
tasking and and was very curious to me
that when the project came out there
were thousands and thousands of people
commenting this project like almost 2
million hits online and was very curious
so this the end I received email from
CEO of super companies and to Zen gurus
about the real meaning of mono tasking
to multitasking so this means that at
that time the topic was very relevant
and people were really interested in in
something that was touching them from
multiple ways the last thing I want to
underline here is a critical speculative
design project need to be present in a
way that need to be physical and the
value of physicality I think is very
strong those are two project from one of
my course about science fiction and
product design and and the value of
having objects real object even if the
objects are fictional but the quality of
the material and the semiotic of the
object is much stronger than a story
itself so I I push the students to
really build beautiful objects very
detailed and and yes functional in some
way so trying to redefine the role of
function within this new design world so
the the role of glass the role of
plastic the role of joins how how the
object is structured and how the
material and the aesthetic are speaking
about critical issues I think this is
something that is very peculiar to
design activity and need to be included
in any design speculation or this this
is another project made by students in
Geneva and Switzerland and again this
speaks about a telepathic helmet that
obviously there is no technology here
involved yet but the quality of the
artifact itself is incredibly effective
to communicate the fictional message so
I think even though design itself is
always projected towards the future so
we are designing something that people
will use in the future it's very
important to connect it to the present
and consider any critical speculative
speaking alternative as a present view
of our daily problems okay thank you so
Cameron and I were just grappling for
who could be the closer I'm gonna let
him do it he's better qualified than I
and I forgot and I did a few edits just
before as we were talking so as I can
store my new presentation over I'd like
to start with the premise that I can you
guys hear me all right do I need to be
close with the microphone
so my position here is contingent I
suppose and the premise of my talk and
the premise of what I hope the part of
the conversation can go to today is both
an affirmation of critical designs
project and I see that project as
dismantling the kind of tight fit
between design and industry that is to
say to remove ourselves from the burden
of being the handmaiden to industry a
kind of historical burden that I believe
that critical designers like done and
Rabi like Paolo are helping to to take
this apart to remove the insistence that
we must be instrumental and to recognize
so to affirm that as both as a necessary
Enterprise that needs to continue
but the renovation of our world though
the work that I believe that needs to be
done can't be accomplished solely on the
back of critical design so I want to
take this opportunity to make a plea for
a parallel project something that I
would call a post critical practice one
that this evening speaker at the
architecture and humanism conference
bernard tschumi actually helped Shepherd
in the 70s and 80s in architecture as a
kind of a parallel example write a post
critical practice that would open more
avenues for engagement and more
opportunities for us to think about how
to critically work on the significant
problems that we face today I believe
that such a post critical practice ought
to take the form of a more pragmatic
approach one that admits the contingency
of our efforts that engaged significant
engaged making will always only get us
so far
but at the same time one that continues
to strive and demand for the kind of
levels of agency and authorship that we
associate with critical design that kind
of autonomy a willingness to set
ourselves the task and to figure out how
best to accomplish that task in a
broader context so I'm going to share
some recent work that I've been involved
in as an example of what such an applied
practice might look like I'm sharing it
with you in the spirit of this is a
subjecting myself and some of this work
to criticism and to recognizing the
contingency of it even as we talk about
it today the the work that I've been
doing as the chief design officer and
now chief Learning Officer for a
purpose-driven strategy and innovation
company called epic decade is striving
for these kinds of autonomy striving for
these kinds of agency striving for these
kinds of authorship and its efforts are
contingent imperfect and incomplete
however it is an example that draws on
the tools and techniques of critical and
discursive design in this case to engage
participants in envisioning new futures
in advance of the design work when we
began the company for example we
convened a group of about 50 people to
ask them to help us identify what were
the major challenges that needed to be
confronted in the next 10 15 to 20 years
and through organized conversations
through discourse through a salon like
atmosphere we identified five potential
tracks how would we live learn work play
and sustain ourselves in the 21st
century
so this post critical design idea or
this plea for a post critical design
would share I believe or ought to share
some of the more laudatory features of
critical practice that is to say or as
an example of that deep questioning
asking the essential questions focusing
first on the larger systems and contexts
to see where one might work to see where
intervention is possible to see where an
approach or a way in to realize more
significant or leverage more significant
change might be possible or necessary as
I said in our case that first bit of
asking those deeper questions that was
essentially what we called essential
questions was what yielded us the the
mission for the company yielded us the
direction to say to try to see these
areas that we wanted to engage and that
were needful for engagement and to build
through that discursive practice a
community and a network of professional
practitioners who are willing to and
excited to engage us in those efforts I
should say that the the epic decade has
looked at these sort of two modes of
practice as a practical commercial
enterprise one in which we do more
direct work with individual clients and
a kind of more traditional consultative
basis and another in which we're
building consortium partners and
stakeholders to work on these larger
what we call epic challenges that we
face in the epic decade the second these
consortium sort of projects I think are
help us illustrate or may be useful here
to think about the how important it is
again as another one of the features of
critical design to think in these
systems to think how one must engage
systems in order to enter and what
systems need to be turned on or
energized or manipulated in order to
achieve ambitious like fantastic
emissions and they mean fantastic both
in the sense of the kinds of more
fictional critical design or speculative
design practices but also just in terms
of you know crazy broad ambitions so
this over this last year we were working
with a community in northern Alberta
that had set itself the most amazing
ambition that I have ever seen
a metropolitan it group set which was to
become a global model of sustainable
living this is quite a challenge
anywhere quite a challenge even more if
you are the gateway city to the oil
sands and quite a challenge when you are
setting this ambition through a
municipal development and a municipal
planning process and so we worked with
this community we worked with the people
in the community we worked with the
social sector and the for-profit sector
to help try to model to understand what
we describe is a kind of conceptual
operating system or a cultural operating
system might be necessary for them to
work as a community to achieve this goal
not to think about it solely in the
terms of the formation of the built
environment but to think about how they
would need to restructure their culture
their education their health and welfare
systems if they were to actually be able
to accomplish this the third thing I
would argue for or the plea that I would
make in this model of post critical
design would be one that is not afraid
to engage the marketplace or commercial
interests and to again use some of the
extraordinary features that we're seeing
in fictional and speculative design to
help craft the stories and narratives
that can inspire those commercial
enterprises to look beyond or to see
their narrow interests being quote
positioned and driven in the service of
larger cultural political or social
ambitions
these broader strategies of framing
stories and visions of constructing
fictions and in this case this is an
example of some work that we've done as
a in our client based work with the
company that shall not be named but a
company that is was interested in and is
trying to figure out how their work to
serve their small business clients and
customers may be understood in the
context of a national issue that if they
can help small businesses become more
effective and more efficient if they can
help small businesses being more
effective and grow that they are in fact
planning an essential role in the
rebuilding of a national the national
American economy given that the great
propriety the great preponderance of
jobs over since 2008 that have been
created have been created by small
businesses so in this way using a
fiction using an inspiring fiction the
kind of what what innovated what
innovation consultants might call a
North Star narrative to galvanize a
company to galvanize an organization or
an institution to see their work in
light of these larger goals and in fact
to then redirect some of those efforts
and redirect some of that work to help
achieve those larger goals so for a post
critical practice to work this way and
indeed for us to work on the future that
we all hold so dear and a future that is
so to work towards the future
unnecessary a possible a plausible
future as as Paolo said one in which we
not only want to live but where we can
survive I think requires that we think
of that we develop a practice and a mode
of discourse that works side-by-side
with critical design or speculative
design or discursive design and one that
is strengthened by being challenged by
the kind of design criticism that susan
has shared with
today and that will hear more about
throughout the day because of that kind
of criticism that kind of direct
observation the the work of critical
social science the work of the
evidence-based evaluations of the impact
of art of our efforts as opposed to
aesthetic ones right we've seen quite a
number over the last few years of social
innovation projects that are winning
awards because they look pretty though
they do nothing understanding that we
need these contests kind of critical
distance brought to us by critics by
social scientists indeed by scientists
in order if we are going to be able to
engage in the change that we must drive
towards when that as Ian said this
morning I hope that today's events will
contribute to the formation of this new
post critical plus critical or perhaps
post critical again practice as we move
to what I hope will not be our post
future thank you
Charlie
I'm not I'm not sure we got that order
arrives I think I'm gonna be doing
something slightly pre post critical I
think we're gonna be trying to there was
that sort of great moment when people
were always Damon referring to more of
those the great post structuralist days
when people kept coming up to a whole
bunch of people announcing a bunch of
posts and saying but we never finished
that thing that you said has ended
already
and so in a way I think I'm gonna try
and say that I think we haven't yet had
a critical design and we should actually
have a type of critical design so you
know in a weird way I'm going to try and
position this question of futures and
futuring and I want to kind of talk a
little bit about something that Damon
said in the introductory remarks and and
I'm not really going to make it any more
comprehensive but I do think we need to
pause a little bit about what's actually
causing us to suddenly have three books
on futuring in relation to design and
what that's kind of symptomatic of so I
want to talk a bit about that futuring
and I want to talk a bit about this kind
of criticality and I'm doing all this in
the context of the kind of work we're
trying to do a little bit of CMU at the
moment in relation to what we're calling
transition design and it's not a thing
it's an ambition and it's an ambition to
say designers need to be a lot more
responsible for futuring for not just
delivering products into a present or
really just constituting a kind of near
future that is so near its effectively
just a stretching of the present but
that we need to be thinking about the
way in which designers are creating
platforms that create further options so
it's not a kind of utopian in the Olin
right sense let's create a picture over
there and make that picture come to be
real but instead as an attempt to say
well you need a vision in order to pull
yourself forward in order to create some
other possibility in another direction
so I'm talking in that general context
in a way I talked about that in the
essay that has been included on the site
so I'm not going to talk about that so
much I do want to sort of ask a question
and it's a question to myself and I'm
not exactly sure the answer but I do
wonder where
the kind of framework of transition
design that that I and my colleagues are
trying to think about where is this
phenomenon where is critical design in
relation to transition design so that in
essence is the question I'm trying to
ask you and and I would register already
that it is very significant and I've
tried to be quite critical of this that
done ray before example have very
explicitly moved from critical design to
speculative design so this was a very
deliberate move partly because they were
getting brand dilution I think and so
they had to rebrand and now they can
copyright in own this particular one but
I do think it's symptomatic of what's
occurring and I've been heavily critical
of the whole thing but I do want to
indicate that I think there is there's
value there is a lot of important value
in this and it really has been one of
the most significant contributions to
academic design research in recent years
if one wanted to say what is the last
innovation in academic design research
after Scandinavian participatory design
it has been just how mainstream this
practice is within universities as Susan
began yes still incredibly marginal
practice but nevertheless I do think one
could say that there are perhaps three
stages and I want to talk about the
third but the first is that right now we
are producing a bunch of things and we
are not exactly sure what they are going
to future but we all have a vague worry
about what they appear to be futuring
and so I thought the video the Paolo
showed of the work that was done here
was it was a fantastic example of what I
would literally call speculative a
design so here we have a phenomenon
about the end of marketing and the
arising of social media within continued
consumerism and the rise of a kind of
prokaryotes no work no collar kind of
situation one can see that what is
currently available that is a future so
I literally think that is speculative
someone is speculating saying what we
have here is going to create that
possibility what might then do
after having done that kind of
provocation he's taking a little bit
further if these were my students I
would have said okay next iteration like
critique it don't just show me that it's
a worry so that I can half smile
thinking yeah yes I hope that doesn't
come now now literally kind of critique
it but I don't think there is a third
phase which is and that would be to
create debate I want a lot of people now
talking about this identify but there is
a third phase which is okay debate over
we don't want that how do we say no how
do we say no to something that is
already arriving so that's the kind of
context in which I'm trying to talk you
I think one of the things that is often
taken for granted in design schools the
extent to which certainly I have been
finding that when we teach transition
design we presume everybody is aware
that the current direction we are
heading is unsustainable and quite often
I'm bored of those kind of courses that
have to kind of give litanies of all the
disasters that we're about to befall but
every now and then I do need to remind
myself that is very significant numbers
of the population who work very actively
to deny that there is a crisis at all
and so it's very important to just start
thinking we do actually need to be
contemplating these kinds of futures
there are a bunch of people who think
status quo is fine so in this context it
is true that as Damian indicated a whole
bunch of designers have begun thinking
about the way in which design should
take more responsibility for being
future makers to kind of quote the the
title of Susan's book but I think it's
important to recognize that this is
occurring within a general critical
assessment that we have to some extent
lost our capacity to future that in a
strange weight if you were to show
students today the kind of work that the
streamliners were doing if you were to
show them the work of Norman Bel Geddes
or you were to show them something that
Raymond Loewy did or if you were to take
them to the New York World Fair and just
kind of say this was an enormous Lee
hugely successful moment in which a
bunch of people saw a future and 20
years later it arrived
and it was a total disaster but this
incredible moment in which rich pictures
comprehensive pictures were part of the
public discourse compared to I think
totally kind of anecdotal survey but if
I was to say right now guess what you're
a MacArthur Genius and you've been given
the whole of Providence to restructure
and everybody's going to do absolutely
everything you say what do you want it
to look like in ten years you were just
look you know a little bit more trees
people would be happily employed there'd
be bikes farmers markets you know kind
of like that the level of our capacity
to actually think about these types of
things I think is in crisis and this is
part of the context in which we are
working and there are in fact whole
traditions within design right now which
are actively refusing this which says
don't think about that future just
tinker now just make crap out of a 3d
printer that is sufficient right this is
what design is you you just simply
engage in these kinds of behaviors you
have a whole discourse actually sitting
there saying we have lost the capacity
to actually be critical about anything
at the moment anybody is critical
they're accused of snarking on internet
that even those who have been the voice
of mainstream criticism now seem to be
recanting and stepping back from it this
is the framework in which I think you
need to be thinking about critical
design arising why does critical design
arise at the very moment that our
society is appearing to sort of give up
on the practice of criticism altogether
and of course larger discourses that say
don't even think about the future the
future is unanticipated you must not
actually contemplate these every time
people have tried you they've got it
wrong your job is merely to be prepared
in terms of resilience for any kind of
disaster that may befall you just need
to have the capacity to bounce back from
whatever is going to happen but we can't
possibly anticipate it or you this you
should treat this as an opportunity to
become different in terms of Nassim
Taleb argument this is an opportunity to
become stronger to become superhuman you
should be looking for these kind of
Black Swan disasters because there are
moments of transformation do not think
about the future do not be critical
just maintain a kind of agility and then
in another kind of discursive context we
we have a lot of people sitting around
saying you cannot talk about the future
speculatively you can only talk about it
factually so the only way to have a
substantive discourse about the future
is based on current numbers current
technology which is to some extent what
this manifesto is is coming out of the
breakthrough Institute like in a funny
way
the breakthrough Institute is the most
ironic name I've ever heard because they
don't want to break through to anything
other than existing portfolios with
strong presence of nuclear so because
that's what we know right you just can't
anticipate although there is a kind of
Promethean quality to it one of them
just denied it and then there are the
full-on Promethean so the funny thing is
I'm saying we've lost a capacity to
future in kind of popular media to some
extent in design education and yet in a
weird way this vacuum is being filled by
the tech elite who have very strong
versions of those futures and you
absolutely have the monopoly on saying
that they are inevitable right now
there's nothing you can do these things
are coming
we shouldn't even risk assess those
people who any luck at all critical
about the human potential for
transcendence are the enemy like quite
literally an impostor law formulation
here so I think what are we trying to do
in transition design it is try and
formulate other ways of having a
discussion about the future and ways
that recognize the agency of design in
actually mobilizing new ways to think
about the future so it is literally a
recognition that futures are in crisis
and we need design to actually help us
think about these things without them
being transcendent posthuman without
them being reactionary or proaction arey
any of those so we're attempting to kind
of navigate it's a very Scylla and
Charybdis kind of argument so very
quickly one could say you know one needs
to contemplate that there are different
ways of navigating the future I can have
a kind of future I can
that cast from that I have this picture
that's a desirable one how do we get
there from here
I can go in the other direction and say
I'm going to forecast what is our
current state how do we actually move
there and I can identify what might
occur to get us in that particular path
hopefully when I do this analysis it
will be based on some historical
sensibility of actually understanding
the forces on the present I don't
understand the present as merely open to
the future but it's already with a
particular trajectory so I understand
that it's heading in particular ways I
recognize that those are multiple
trajectories multiple histories are
manifest in the present and if I am at
this kind of top trajectory it will head
in this I get a spectrum of forecasts
all of this is standard for sighting
kind of sense I understand that there
are various stresses that might modify
that path along the way there might be
one off events which might significantly
accelerate some of those stresses or
some of those trends and so I start to
get a spectrum of what's going and of
course this is exactly the the rhetoric
that donor a be when finally dis
coursing as Susan identified around they
work just borrow this from Stewart candy
who borrowed it from de tour and it
comes out of future studies and you kind
of get this idea that supposedly what
critical or speculative design is doing
is contributing to how we think about
the future and this there's a not well
resolved sense of what it is actually
doing in that space is its job to
stretch the possible is its job to make
plausible things at the moment seem
impossible is its job to make the merely
possible and not plausible preferable so
here you would see very conservatively
the preferable lies somewhere within the
probable and preferable whereas I would
think that the preferable might actually
lie in the impossible right now given
the current state of our planet so one
is wondering what it is that design does
when it gets into this realm but this is
already very problematic it's a curse
from one particular point in time it
still has this kind of kernel since it
has
history or trajectory I'd be very
interested in beginning to recognize
that in fact we do not exist at one time
we was exist in multiple different
people in different places have
different experiences the present right
now and that each of those have their
own more or less overlapping but
sometimes not even overlapping cones but
the point I really want to make is and
it's exactly with Paolo's talk as well
that to some extent whenever one is
futuring what one is actually doing is
having a fight with the present and then
what designers do is possibly put a
forecast as a way of trying to influence
the present and open up another
direction and this would be a type of
transition design strategy but the
reason I put this future is not because
I want to predict and not even because I
want it to be desirable but to some
extent because I want to influence the
present and make the present change
direction and this is what I mean by
recovering the kind of critical
potential in critical design so it's an
understanding that all futures work is a
version of negotiating the present in
kind of fucose language and it's not
merely about creating what I think are
absolutely appalling versions of near
future
kind of just status quo grained but
rather I think what is interesting about
critical designs intervention is that it
stopped these things being pictures and
exactly in the way that Paolo is
describing it recognizes that the agency
of design lies in this kind of socio
material experiential component these
art world picture versions of the future
these have a recognition about everyday
practices this is precisely the very
special art of design design makes many
futures and sorry I say that with an
Australian accent so you might think I
mean many but I mean it's tiny futures
right it takes bits of the future
meaning I don't know how you say with an
American accent many right you get these
little versions of the future and what
you do is try an experiment them which
is exactly how Stuart candy kind of
describes artifacts of the future which
you evaluate in the present without
having that future to come it's the
opposite of the proaction airy discourse
which says you can't possibly imagine
let's just do it and see this is no we
need to have ways of evaluating these
things before we actually get there and
I think what is interesting again is
that there are a series of discourses in
sociology and anthropology particularly
coming out of SDS world int world which
is recognizing that this is the nature
of human politics it's something that I
think sociology anthropology our
schooling politics in that politics has
been too much a discourse of ideas that
to some extent if you want agency you
need to mess in the material and a
gential you need to mess with the
practice and this is in fact the kind of
origin of critical design one of the
things I would want to recover before we
moved to Charlie's post is the
recognition that what Toni and Fiona
were doing originally was giving these
things to people
these were living labs right it was live
with this future and it was performative
the the object on the your right there
claims to be protecting you from
electromagnetic radiation but does
nothing right it was a placebo device as
with this earthing device for
electromagnetic radiation through your
fine yet the point was to begin having
that imaginary of electromagnetic
radiation living with you in this world
so that you then have a capacity to see
this version of the future but not see
but feel and feel the way in which you
would interact with everyday material
practices and I think this is the the
real power and value this is exactly
what I understand power to have been
arguing for this is the real value of
this and so I would plea for more of
this this is the difference design can
make in the discourse of futuring often
these I've seen in this kind of work as
being highly ambiguous they're just
offered as provocations you know think
about it experience it for six months
and then I'll interview you and I'll put
the interview in the back of the book
it's called design while and we'll
publish it and so there is a sense that
discourse or debate about these things
is somehow we navigate them
whereas I think you know in the kind of
pictures of like Sorkin's terrible
version of New York there is an idea
that what you're actually trying to do
is attract a future so I just want to
put one last in here which is neither
debate nor attract but instead a kind of
repelled version and so we're back to
where I sort of began by saying I want
to think about how on earth do we begin
to say no to certain versions of
technology and right now I think it's
important to recognize we live in the
tyranny of yes particularly designers
themselves designers are the optimistic
ones who learn from theatrical
improvisation you must only say yes to
every offer I said there's an elephant
you have to say yes there's an elephant
and it's really big and it's coming
towards us right you're never allowed to
say no I think it's a whale right you
have to accept the offer and this is a
general kind of ideology manifesting in
all kind of innovation culture in the
same way that everybody is so keen on
failure at the moment but only because
failure is in fact a version of success
there's no actual failure there's no
point at which somebody actually says
that was a really bad idea let's go
backwards as fast as possible let's get
out of this D funder take it away right
there is no version of that at the
moment there are versions of this
strangely enough kicking around I was
just saying to a colleague the other day
I am very interested to be a design
academic in the next decade when these
teenagers arrive at design school
because these are teenagers who've spent
their lives dwelling in a kind of
negative futuring though it has a kind
of Nassim to lab that in fact you can
still be a fantastic celebrity and uber
human in that circumstance so perhaps
they won't have learnt from dystopia at
all but what I really want to say is and
adopting Damian's term prefiguration I
do want to talk about something that
tiny fry once called prefigurative
criticism I want to talk about the way
in which the role of critical design
should actually be to take on the job of
saying no
so there's a vague polyter you've got
argument here that I don't have time to
make which is we live in democracies and
we vote on certain things but the things
that democracy don't work very well for
our market forces where our voting
system is a big lag and very small
agency and so things arrive and we can't
ever really say no to them and I think
this was beautifully captured by Iain
bogosity wrote a nice piece when Apple
watch was first announced in which he
described the kind of ennui with which
we are receiving this thing we're all
kind of sitting back thinking no not
another thing okay it'll come there's
nothing I can do about it I won't buy
the first one because the second one
will be better but I will encounter
people in the street who will have it on
there's nothing I can do it's just
coming right and he's just very
beautifully kind of captured in his
little piece in the Atlantic this kind
of sense of of fate about this so in a
way I want to say well no I think
critical design and particularly
academic critical design is very nice
phrase by Creed II in an interview
recently about critical design your
fantasy praxis is a residue of your
privilege yes there is a privilege in
being in a university doing critical
design and that privilege is to actually
be forcefully critical in trying to
eliminate things and this was something
of the contribution I made to to Susan's
book about elimination design how do you
how do you get rid of things and we have
actually some spectacular examples of
this version of prefigurative criticism
we succeeded in getting rid of Google
glass and we should be really happy and
proud of this this was a great moment in
humanity
it was a bad and stupid idea right and
yet it had the full force of one of the
tech elite companies with one of the
largest bankrolls
combining with the power of high-end
fashion it was rolling out there was a
moment at which it felt inevitable and
yet it was extraordinarily quickly
recoded and repositioned as an
undesirable future now I'm being quick
and fast with the
Ziya and it is true that no one critical
design kind of did this but I think it's
an interesting moment and interesting
possibility we did also I think
effectively Corral the Segway so that
it's not on our streets or it's only
given to those strange versions of
asylum seeking immigrants called
tourists but in a way it has become the
icon for how to refuse something so it's
very very useful pre fricative critical
strategy to say that this is the Segway
of X Apple watch is the Segway of
watches only dorks are going to wear it
so I think it's interesting to start
thinking about the way in which it is
actually possible to use the symbolic
economy and particularly this socio
material experiential practice version
to begin generating noes to begin
generating refusals of certain types of
technology and so I'll leave you just
with these kind of these four
suggestions that that the job of a pre
fricative critical designer someone is
engaging in critical designing in order
to do prefigurative practices that are
going to stop certain futures and so
actually change the present and open up
other futures it's not like we can just
add futures we need to take some away as
well so active D futuring is an active
kind of visual communication symbolic
economy are kind of recoding in which
one repositions a product with the
things it does not want to be associated
with one can reposition it right now a
lot of these things are thrown out there
no one quite knows what they're for a
whole bunch of people sit watching the
metrics and work out know the value
proposition is there quick pivot scrum
run go pivot capture that market value
that's a fantastic moment at which one
can hijack these processes and actually
show them to be available for horrible
values moments at which you are actually
going to mess with the metrics by
creating possibilities you literally
reposition the product where it does not
want to be in its unvalued area one
might try to deal with expectation
management I'm not try to reroute these
things all technologies
arrived with particular kind of
trajectories and what one is doing is
actually critiquing what you can expect
from this it's kind of the second-order
influence and the last would be a kind
of acceleration a strategy literally
kind of pushing something as fast as
possible and so to return to the video
that Paolo showed actually making that
situation not just comic but viscerally
horrible actually taking it even further
designing very well the worst so that
something ends it's kind of diffusion
run as soon as possible and so I'll
close just with the only example I've
seen recently in relation to Apple watch
which is sir a very nice little piece
Susan might appreciate it for it's a
fictional reference here but you might
say that it's a review done by Patrick
Bateman of American Psycho fame thanks
thanks Cameron so I was making hands
symbols that Damien while we were
talking and he's he did this so we
probably have about 15 more minutes I'm
assuming that we're five minutes close
to the end of our time and I think this
means ten more and what we thought we
would do first would be simply to open
up to the floor these are some questions
that we have been asked to think about
or touch base with or maybe come back to
our themes but for our purposes and
given the time that we have we thought
was probably more interesting to engage
and hear from from you guys questions
thoughts responses
I'm standing too close to something
internal muzaffer teach art history
architectural history here so
fascinating interaction or contemplation
on what and you know from different
perspectives or how we deploy the idea
of the future to make it weigh in on the
present right to disclose that it's not
one thing there is multifaceted to
disclose its own content stations within
it right so future then future or
fiction is no longer something which is
separate from it but bears and redefines
how we understand the present one thing
that I and this might be part of these
projects that I was looking for was this
all seem to target two people or two
contingencies who can pay right so it's
about if marketing people who can pay
and pay in a sense that they can pay to
be in the public realm so and therefore
to the one one way one can say that our
societies are organized or cities are
the very idea of public is based on that
you are able to own and support a
private route so you go babe
change whatever you know you can be
in the private round fine but then we
come you look neat clean your if you can
do that you seem to be loitering right
so this we have no sort of thing the
people who can't pay for their existence
in the public sphere right we name them
homeless but they might have a home and
for other reasons can't you know go
there psychological stress what not
right so it constitutes a huge
population in cities so in engaging the
public realm can we engage people in
some way those who can't pay or do we
have to stay within the market economy
and the norms that accepts this this is
the ultimate critique is of the market
economy so one would infer in most ideal
schema that the people who would benefit
from an on market driven economy or a
modulated market driven economy might be
those with less power direct engagement
with marginalized populations there's
tons of co.design practices I wouldn't
call them futuring because the situation
is deeply present you don't want to
engage oh I don't think it's appropriate
to engage homelessness and thinking
about homelessness in 20 years 30 years
40 years maybe it's a good academic
exercise but the very real presence of a
body on the street requires I think a
different response the first is that
what I hear in your question is an
important critic of critical design he
was kind of in the critique white about
privilege I think it manifests most
beautifully so I had a colleague sorry
based in Pakistan who just made behind a
repeated point that quite often
dystopias that are imagined by RCA
students are realities experienced by
people in South Asia and they're always
a bit annoying to discover that what
they thought was a future is actually
like present yeah yeah yeah and so one
could say for speeding there's nothing
speculative about a proposition around
the force-feeding
and you don't have to go to Guantanamo
Bay to do that you could be anybody in
the military with a certain color of the
intake and I think that sometimes with
more sophisticated versions will say no
we recognize that it's just that you
have to put it in a consumerist future
to draw attention to it for the
population who don't have that emotion
but I think the kind of privilege of
critical design is a valid critique
privilege I think the second thing I'd
say is there are there is lots of
interesting examples of practitioners
working in the space of more
marginalized people's future and so a
lot of the work adventure Manzini will
begin with a presumption that these
kinds of pressures they find ways of and
the job of the designer is never doing a
very good job with the designers managed
to strengthen existing innovations so
there are people future in themselves
dealing with well I can add something
and well recalling what what what I said
before is it's very important to not D
contextualizing even a critical activity
so it's very important to focus on
specific problems and sometimes everyone
is asking
designed to solve universal problems we
have problems with water wall design we
have problem with food well design and
but it's not like that I think design
has been overestimated in in a lot of
context in a lot of ways and I think one
of the way to address it properly is
just looking at the context simply as it
is and the second one about the second
note is about privileges it's not a
mystery that critical activity is
privileged
I mean critical design speculative
design mostly lie in academia and even
ku does it professionally and in
practice got a salary from academia most
of them so and but this is not bad or
good it's just the way research works
and the the good thing is eventually
this research that is not immediately
connected with the market played the
role of inspiration and for for for
practical solutions that observation but
I think that as we saw in the emergence
of critical architecture in the 70s 80s
and 90s I think what we're seeing in the
larger design world today is boredom and
discontent with being constrained by the
marketplace and be constrained by
commercial practices right that is it is
part of what is contributing to these
larger calls for seeing design as the
work of the public sphere and larger
calls for being more clear about what
what we can be responsible for and so I
would observe that and then the second
observation I might make
in response to the question is I think
that this the need for more careful
evaluation hmm an assessment of the
substantive contribution that you know
different modes of design practice might
play isn't local to critical design
right we see it in social innovation
right now and I would argue that you
know the these kinds of evidence-based
or critical evaluations post you know
what in the architectural world might be
thought about it's almost like
post-occupancy evaluation but at the
same time we don't we're not really I
would say don't know what we're doing
happy to get your side of it my
impression was precisely that that focus
on the context is a strategy right so
that it sort of challenges the idea of
universality of design and I mean it is
90s every project you can think of on
the city would be about the homeless I'd
provide them this kind of shelter which
is good but that precisely reduces the
complexity or the weight of the body in
in public sphere what do you do are just
providing shelter doesn't solve the
problem or portray the experience you
know your question is really interesting
I just want to add one more thing
because it came up and Paulo provoked a
thought I still have a big issue with
it's one thing for academia to pursue
you know critical features for it to
educate talk to stimulate young
designers but it's another thing to
publish the work and then have it be so
obscurantist there's a I really really
resent it i litmus test as I have a very
intelligent mother who's 89 and I give
her my writing and I give her other
people's writings and I gave her dud and
rabies book
and I said just flip through it what is
this about she had no clue not even a
clue and I think that's a huge problem
when you you know illustrate a book that
much the illustration should seek to be
so important so there's an elitism in
the discourse that has to be tempered
with the performative but I think I
absolutely agree with the Cameron that
the performative I often think about
polish theater in the seventies and
eighties where they would have plays in
blood centers or blood drive centers I
mean he's just so powerful but high so
I'm a brown student and I spend a lot of
time at RISD but I study urban studies
and the first time that I engaged with
the idea of critical design was with
critical urbanism which is a really
fascinating section of critical design
there's an awesome book called people
for our cities for people not cities for
profit some sort of comparison of that
and for me critical design comes off as
this very like new-age interesting
pushback on all of these important
things that you guys have been talking
about but you guys also used the word
speculative as much as you did critical
and I was wondering if you could talk a
little bit about that because for me
from an urban perspective that really
flips the dynamic around a lot because
and I study the US so like I'm fairly
specific to that but speculative design
is something that created the United
States that we have today land
speculation is something that like drove
every all of the policy that we have
today all over the property ownership
that defines this world in the US again
is based on practices of speculation
things like statistical analysis of the
markets is entirely speculative design
in the sense that you don't have the
knowledge going in and you're going to
go in and make an assumption of some
kind to design a future that you would
like to get to and sort of prototype
that but it's with markets and money and
this like fabricated sort of world it
also applies to things with policy or
criminal justice I think Minority Report
is something that is like embedded in
in from when I was younger but the
premise of that movie is that you can
speculate that someone will be guilty of
something and charge them beforehand and
then how does that create our world and
but when you put that in the context of
today with racial profiling and
everything that has come to the
forefront like that's a lot of
speculative design that goes on every
single day so yeah I was wondering if
you had any thoughts on maybe the
distinction between a critical versus
speculative is critical speculative
design being turned on itself being that
speculative is around all the time right
now so it it was a strike it struck me
as a strange move when turning if you
understand recharacterizing the work of
speculation and to some extent I think
the book argues that they are moving
from a critique which would appear that
you have a set value position to
position of asking questions and
provoking discussion and so they're very
explicit about the role of ambiguity in
their projects and the fact that it's
impossible to tell whether they are for
or against the future that they've
materialized in this artifact so I think
when just to kind of speak about their
use of it they're deliberately using it
to mean generating ambiguity and an
ambiguity that will generate a
discussion I do think that it's a really
naive move to make right now
narcissistic quote that colleague around
in to them recently and said what did
you think of this critique and the only
comment was I think evidence is spending
too much time in America it's a strange
comment but I thought a pretty
interesting one I think one of the one
of the naivety is and one of the things
I'm going to be very briefly there I
think it's very important to indicate is
that on the one hand sometimes people
dystopian someone living in South Asia
says that already exists I think one of
the things that's really naive about
speculative design is to imagine that
these crazy speculations coming out of
the abundant privilege privilege of
abundance I'm not in fact exactly what
is happening in the market right now
so when VCS are wandering around just
throwing money at a bunch of 20
year-olds and just saying let's see what
happens to you in a year and I only need
you know one of these 20 to pay off so
the rest of you can just burn and die
and you know I have no idea what he caps
for but let's just see these this is
this is speculation and this is not
speculation in the privileged realm of
academia this is speculation in a
privileged bubble absolutely in a kind
of development mentality of urbanism and
real estate speculation right now we are
being futures by speculation quite
literally in terms of that sort of VC
culture being thrown at tech craziness
and I think to some extent I'm trying to
reposition this talk of critical design
of critical futures in the fact that we
need to be a lot more sophisticated we
can't be as naive as when they talk
about speaking that way because that
word exactly as you've identified has
all these currencies and it is actually
well I just yeah I just say something in
addition to that very quickly I mean
some some of the Fiona done and the
Caribbean and Tony Dunne students I mean
some of them like James holder he
stepped directly from critical design to
actually design fiction so like over
passing that phase of speculative design
and in some way rejecting it so there is
a part of the movement that is actually
rejecting speculative as the Phoenicians
and they immediately transformed it in
design fiction and I think that the main
problem is when we try to transfer
speculations into reality so speculation
should remain speculations and if the
speculations arrive to reality should be
something else and should be an
evolution of the speculation the
problems happens when we try to adapt or
or transform something well not
transform like to transfer something
from a speculative environment into a
commercial and real environment there is
a step missed sometimes a lot of gaya or
another student interactions was someone
who did in fact take that bridge between
speculative designers speculation quite
literally in a thesis project by
engaging with a series of people with
Goldman Sachs around apocryphal
scenarios and just how you could
possibly make money out of really sort
of horribly disastrous situations and
then did the kind of filmic project
around them that are creating very
moreish kind of sexy versions of people
just plotting what is basically evil so
her work in fact I think is evidence
that we shouldn't only focus on
