okay I welcome everyone to the third
panel which is as you can see is called
obfuscation the contextualization the
limits of critical design its place in
the conference is a little unsettled or
unfixed I am because it's meant to look
at the themes that we've been talking
about try to look at them from other
disciplinary perspectives and see that
when what appears to us to be at the
center of design when imagine from other
places or other concerns reveals
something which then could be very
critical itself for design thinking and
I was actually very amused when I first
saw the poster and I think still up that
this sense of non placement actually
permitted the the website the way we
were described to different departments
I was in Damien's department history
philosophy sociology which Empire and
there's a a 10 points they are commas
pluses to indicate history floss with
plus social science but in Daniels case
its large slashes animation with you and
then wrote of insulin is also a practice
briga was a stealing sociology yes which
is not so I should correctly I just
copied it from from the site he is in
anthropology so but this confusion is I
think productive and shows precisely the
possibility of to come from various
disciplinary perspective or be at the
boundary or threshold so let me very
briefly introduce our panelists you Rico
Saito in history philosophy and social
sciences and risky works with ethics of
production and making everyday ethics
and you would describe it more in detail
sometimes it deals with issues of food
but also with how the rim of that glass
in front of her is curved and what kind
of implication is help for how weird
that plastic come from and our source
and how labor work sorry Daniel Fells
equally diverse set of concerns under
his practice in film animation and video
is practicing artists performance
artists which work in all over the world
from Sweden recently to as well as in
the United States and has been a great
interview cater for me personally at
RISD and defining or understanding what
criticality means in different arenas
briga partisan briga very good friend
from brown teaches at anthropologie not
sociology
but between sociology and philosophy his
first book is called anthropology the
ground between anthropology and
philosophy and his second book we just
came out quest poverty and the quest for
life also combines the two perspective
looking at you know anthropological
inquiry but what sort of philosophical
lenses are usually deployed in looking
at the world and how we can transform
them to reveal new forms of existence
aspirations it looks at a community in
central in India and he described his
work in that regard today I myself
teaching art history I am an
architectural historian my work deals
with third world development and how
design has influenced or define the idea
third one I am searching for my life
here the conference or the idea of this
panel discussion with Damien came from a
very simple question how does design and
largely design also arts can define
acknowledged reflect deal with
complexity on the ground what I argue
that usually in the mainstream and
designers go abroad especially abroad
dealing with a context which is
different in which they have to talk
across difference difference of race
class gender all these historical tropes
if you will when they have to encounter
it they try to work with the most
ethical earnest point of view but
nevertheless flatten the complexity on
the ground so even the most well-meaning
design erases historical complexity
rather than technology
and therefore it fails fails in a
literal sense that it erases the
existence if there are two groups of
poor on the ground and designers go in
and make a school and I'll show you a
specific example for the poor in the
village if they don't recognize that
division the poor one poor will benefit
from the school the poor of the poor
would write but even their existence is
now obligated from representation from
gaining access or their existence being
recognized so is there a way that we can
still make the same school and record
show that my work step over those five
deals with how that discourse of experts
going elsewhere and experts from it's a
two sided thing so people go and people
come are talking about specific way of
helping the poor and defining bomb you
know the whole idea development funded
by specific institutions creates this
sort of network of international experts
and they produce certain categories like
the poor the village which are very much
in currency unexamined in our social
engagements both in poor and it is hard
to use not not use that word writing is
a flattening world and and dis
privileged if you want to call it
communities across the world an
architecture I has amazing instrument
which frames a certain idea of labor at
work but i'll focus open the panel with
more contemporary example so what
happens at moma everyone is familiar
with Museum of Modern Art in New York
every sixty years or so MoMA has this
you know they wake up at night that we
haven't been doing any social engagement
and the amount of said no we are a
socially responsible institution it's
not just about high-end architecture and
they do something which I mean they've
been waking up more recently so you know
there's this was two thousand
in this exhibition small-scale big
change describing socially sensitive
architectures or social engagement all
over the world and now there's been
another one more recently so I will give
an example of this school mette handmade
school in Roger pool bangladesh designed
by an austrian architect I've talked to
the architect I've talked to the futures
and the boat Albany and it was you know
described as made from local materials
the community participant killed and
school together and in the end what
produce was this fabulous school you
know with children happy child right in
front of you non what else do you so
there is proof of that village you know
finally got their school right but there
was this line in the conference catalog
and if you look up you know other
discussions of the project that a lot of
material was stolen so to convince
people don't steal my blocks from your
school this is your school what's wrong
with you your children are going to go
there and they kept stealing it so that
was the long-term problem cultural
problem we'll have to know you know send
another mission to educate them it turns
out if you do a different google search
you don't have to gain an apology but
simply fall from a different google
search you get a different idea or a
picture of historical complexity there
to kind of course in fact i would say
more but why not own property and then
they are tribals and within that those
tribals their various groups of
classified tribal sort summer column
primitive travels d notified rival
straight and there those are the poorest
of the poor they don't own any property
their land actually had been taken
hundreds of years ago first by that
mogul transformation of the landscape
than the British and then the national
government straight so the property
landed in the hands of the poor with
property now the school is being made
and the people who are stealing material
are the poor the tribals the poor of the
poor who don't own
trivia property in this village and who
work for these poor they have no stake
in the school they are so poor they
can't even send their children they
won't be able they know won't be able to
send their children in this school so
the only recourse or only engagement
with this is to steal material right
that's only the mode of survival for
them so I asked a museum curator when he
visited grizzly well is there a way that
you can show this division right and I
suggested or made a suggestion one way
to do that would be make the same school
there but how many of us are going to go
there school see that's cool lobby most
probably make the same school there but
in the moma exhibition ask your auntie
deb to make our speculative drawing of
this school 10 years from now when maybe
cover story has been stolen ask them to
design the school with material that is
meant to be stolen but then you bring
into existence of the group that you
were obfuscating even from recognizing
that they exist the design can do those
brilliant story and Britt was book about
these tribals in central India who go to
the forest and I mean they don't own the
forest but at weddings they you know say
I give you this hill a true to the other
tribe that's right I give you this is
what are they giving they don't own the
the hey it's the picking rights right I
Drive to thick wood from that forest
which is not owned by so different
relationship with the land of a
different idea of ownership right so now
I imagine maybe okay instead of generic
idea of material to the stolen Mary
color-coded there are some great
we recognize that didn't tribal
communities they are all these crimes
I'll try other divisions and they at
their weddings come to this school and
say I give you class room for a right to
steal material from that right this is
these are not some mind-boggling concept
that is the historical reality and
design for them for us designers we
don't have the lens or the categories
that employ doesn't allow us to read or
deploy this complexity in a productive
quote-unquote critical way to bring it
into as part of the problem ah how much
time do I have okay very quickly another
example in this was a school Gondor than
by in burkina faso by the certificate
the atmosphere is correct the idea was
you teach these workers welding in the
rest of the school will be built by a
break and it was thought to be you know
you're teaching them employment and all
these workers would go and find projects
and maybe such a wonderful thing again
if you look at the history especially of
Burkina Faso and tribal Burkina Faso it
is divided by tribes and tribal cultures
and not rise like you know or tradition
whatever these tribes were designed by
the British as a way of indirect route
so they didn't see any white person you
know policing them with a gun they were
done by new formation of new network of
local chiefs who were given immense
penal power judicial power to deploy
people from mines to the city to to the
farmyard depending on the demands of the
colonial economy and it created you
couldn't go from one village to the
other without you know having the paper
by the cheap so it's an immensely
saturated landscape with very clear
divisions right antagonisms so after
independence those antagonism continue
this guy might learn all the weather you
know when thing that he can but he will
not be able to move on this village be
back this is distance so i suggest again
i suggested this to giver her teach them
different welding techniques not one so
as they move and warehouses all over
there is a cartography of difference
which it recognizes the destruction of
history and then then what is the
restriction that history places on
movement contemporary example this is a
new project at moma about imagining
future cities this is lagos architects
now love Lagos and it's like this is
such a wonderful place and everyone
things are happening so what would it
look like in the future i think is not
the establishment is now 20 minutes
across the city centre by steeple any of
the new city center combines the hero
rate of cultures of Makkah for the grand
ambitions of Eko Atlantic City and the
characteristics of venice and amsterdam
why should we imagine that the world
will modernize according to the same
criteria the secular criteria of poor to
working-class to entrepreneurs to
self-sufficient whatever right that's
our idea of globalization it won't all
you need to do is do a different google
search and you know that these images
red green and blue are not just because
they want to paint their houses
different color they're highly coded
gang the visuals Lagos is the most
entrenched gang boundary in the world
and it is not just hang on long drugs
but also divided the wrong religious
line so these are Christian different
sects of Christianity Muslim divisions
and their hybrid and these divisions are
negotiated by the students and who are
actually the powder Brooks our
intermediary between our groups and the
ground and that in from that University
so if you're going to imagine a future
of Lagos don't imagine that those
politics will disappear this this red
brick will have a cross on it and this
green one will have a crescent body and
the access should not be going to the
doctor but to the University of course
the moment curator said can't do that we
will lose our sponsors
can we do that that's the question this
panel Oh Houston I thought I was
teaching a class i could walk around
okay um is that okay Damien okay so um
well it's Lily's hard act to follow and
actually the whole morning sessions were
really hard act to follow and my talk I
feel is going to be very sort of
different I teach philosophy my
expertise is aesthetics and so my
contribution is going to be more in
terms of that sort of the way in which
that we experience object aesthetically
and how that has a bearing on various
problems so I won't be addressing
specifically about design but I think
that there are lots of design
implications my viewpoint and examples
are strictly from us and partly from
Japan that's where I'm from but I've
been living in the States more than I
lived in Japan so it is very limited
because I am very concerned about the
aesthetics regarding consumerism my
working aesthetics has been focused on
everyday aesthetics and in particular I
have been very concerned about the way
in which aesthetics which is sometimes
considered to be kind of like a fluff or
superficial really has severe
consequences a better or worse on the
quality of life and state of the world
and let me give you a few examples very
some of them are kind of silly but
nevertheless very serious the
quintessential aesthetic ideal of
domesticity in the United States is
green lawn and now we are beginning to
realize the call environmental costs of
maintain cultivating maintaining green
lawn but many people keep on doing that
because they want up uphold the
aesthetic ideal the laundry detergent
see I'm really interesting everyday
really mundane so if you compare these
two laundry detergents the seven
which is environmentally sound that
essentially failed a consumer report
grading because because they are lacking
the kind of optical brightener which is
essentially a blue fluorescent dye which
makes a white shirt bright white and so
the end product of the laundering shirt
is a very dismal when you try to dry
laundry the many communities in the
United States they prohibit laundry
hanging outdoor laundry hanging why well
because it's an eyesore it's unsightly
so again the aesthetic is you know
concerning the the effect to the
environment when you go to grocery store
many fruits and vegetables are uniform
color uniform size shape and it is
because one-third of one-third of the
fruits farm fruits and vegetables have
been discarded for the former or the
supermarket for aesthetic reasons and
these are rejects the cucumber's rejects
from European Economic Community yeah
because they have a very specific
standard about the curvature of the
cucumber thank goodness for French
supermarket which instituted the
inglorious fruit they have a specific
bin of all the deformed vegetables and
fruits and sell it very cheap and
supposedly they are doing really well
but anyway these are kind of like a very
mundane city examples but to show how
our aesthetic preference and taste have
serious consequences which we don't
nobody think about now comes to when we
contemplate on the aesthetics involved
in our consumerism in the United States
as Virginia postural mentions aesthetics
whether people admit it or not is why
you buy something sometimes yes we do
buy things out of necessity but
in this day and age most people buy
things because of the that because it's
more stylish and it's more updated so we
fall into this perceived obsolescence
phenomenon because I grew up in Japan
when I came to the states and then had
family raising children I always
wondered why starting august there is a
frenzy of back-to-school sale and I I
never understood that and because some
of the clothes and the sneakers and
backpacks from the previous year still
work but there's this a frenzy of having
to update the Wardrobe so and this one
is the the recent Time magazine I
apologize for the slow gram and the page
from which it was taken us children make
up just as three-point-one percent of
the global kids population but American
families by forty percent of the world's
toys so that's pretty staggering so the
people here are suffering from the race
recent book stuff vocation we are
suffocating with stuff but the the
problem really is much more serious than
us suffering from most stuff location
and this is the what is making these
products available and that is usually
happening away from here and I'm quoting
from this work and by my colleague
aesthetics or elsewhere who says mines
particularly open pit mines or mountains
mountaintop removal mines us seen by
many as ugly so too with logging sites
as well as the various industrial
facilities from which the raw materials
for even the most beautiful buildings
and artworks are sourced same point is
made by David or the problem is that we
do not often see the true ugliness of
the consumer economy and so are not
compelled to do much about it the
distance between shopping malls and
mines Wells corporate farms factories
toxic dumps and unfilled sometimes half
a world away dampens our perceptions
that some
it's fundamentally wrong and it's
interesting that of course they are
concerned about you know human rights
violation environmental degradation but
they couch the whole thing is an in
aesthetic term ugliness so taking the
notion of aesthetics of elsewhere these
are the pears here and elsewhere another
here and elsewhere another here and
elsewhere the top right is of course the
Bangladesh garment factory collapse and
here and elsewhere so when we have this
kind of disconnect or conflict between
the positive aesthetic value here and a
negative aesthetic value elsewhere what
do we do about it does it have any
bearing on the aesthetic value of things
here the mainstream institutions in
philosophy circle that I hang out with
usually want to separate the two
considerations so this is a
representative of that view Jane for say
who wrote this aesthetic of design a
couple years ago the fact that some
objects were made in the third world
factory under dismal conditions will
certainly affect our moral judgment of
the objects depending on our view of
international trade and labour laws but
not our aesthetic judgment of their
beauty so the tendency is to try to not
have aesthetic values subsumed under
moral value or have any the moral value
dictate the aesthetic value so that's
the sort of motivation behind this kind
of a tendency to separate I am not
agreeing with that I rather align myself
with them again the aesthetics of
elsewhere guy that is the improvement in
aesthetic value in our surroundings both
the diminishment of aesthetic value
where we aren't we are not talking about
zero-sum game so it's not like if we
want to increase the aesthetic value
here then by necessity we decrease the
aesthetic value elsewhere that's not you
know the situation so
can we have the kind of aesthetic value
increase here while also increasing
aesthetic value elsewhere and the
probably the most prominent view of that
is from again from David or in the
largest sense what we must do to ensure
human tenure on the earth is to
cultivate a new standard that defines
beauty as that which causes no ugliness
somewhere else or at some later time
it's a very strict and notion of beauty
but it sort of really rang a bell and as
I was thinking about I mean this disc
when I read this book first I mean that
really popped out in my mind because I
was reading as an aesthetician and and
then the more I thought about it I
recalled this famous saying of Martin
Luther King jr. injustice anywhere is a
threat to justice everywhere we are
caught in an inescapable network of
mutuality tied in a single garment of
destiny whatever affects one directly
affects all indirectly so we can almost
substitute injustice with ugliness and
justice with beauty to read ugliness
anywhere is a threat to beauty
everywhere so I think it's sort of a
getting at the same kind of notion that
we are all intertwined and our tendency
is to sort of separate and not to
address what you know what doesn't
directly concern me because it's you
know you know occurring somewhere else
no we that's that's artificial
separation and so this Martin Luther
King's of course you know he was talking
about civil rights but I think that has
some kind of resonance to what I am
thinking about and so so if we want to
have this kind of consciousness raising
about beauty here and ugliness there
what do we do and that's where I'm kind
of stuck in terms of whether or not
design can really address
that and the only thing I can think of
not as a from the designers point of
view but in in general is to have a kind
of education which will cultivate what I
will call consumer aesthetic literacy we
teach art education at history and so on
in order to cultivate our sensibility to
be able to appreciate works of art so
what can we do the same thing with
consumer goods I know it's not going to
you know go down well in schools but but
there's there has to be some way in
which that we have to get this
aesthetics of elsewhere really in the
public domain in a very popular way
pataca possibly in the form of like
Inconvenient Truth or food inc that kind
of you know if we can come up with an
equivalent I showed in my class
manufacturer of landscape I burtynsky
and because i saw well that could be the
one of the clothes examples my students
are a lot of problems with that so I
didn't put that in there they had lots
of critical comments about that so
that's that's one sort of a question I
have aesthetics of elsewhere is that a
useful concept to use in thinking about
the aesthetics involved in this problem
and the other one is the what I am
thinking about is the paradigm shift of
consumer aesthetics we are in the frenzy
of pursuing up and appreciating
something which is new novel fashionable
up-to-date cutting-edge imperfection
which does not tolerate any kind of
damage or signs of aging such as wear
and tear so that's the sort of mindset
which fuels our frenzy of getting newer
and newer and newer things or if
something gets a little chip or cracks
then we want to throw it away and we
want to replace that with something
which is quote perfect well if that's
the source source of the problem can we
cultivate different kind of asset
sensibility which celebrates something
enduring something longevity something
seasoned something which works with
nature meaning that embracing and making
creative use out of signs of aging wear
and tear breakage and so on and I walk
in with that which already exists like
repurposing reusing repairing and and
build that up as a sort of aesthetic
category or aesthetic value which would
ask you know inspire people to keep the
the objects and and then handle that in
various ways and this this I I'm
bringing that sort of Japanese
traditional stuff not that you know we
have to be nostalgic and we have to
resurrect the old you know kind of
practice but rather to show that
something which is aging which shows
cracks which may show the sign of wear
and tear is not necessarily
aesthetically negative and this this is
the kind of thing which can be used to
reformulate our concept of what counters
are circularly positive so as you know
the rocawear as the aging process
happens and rubbing and so on the top
layer sort of rubs off and then you get
the black sort of an inner layer so you
get the sort of interesting pattern and
many Japanese pottery after a certain
time starts having a hairline fracture
the sort of crackles and that can add to
the aesthetic appeal of the object and
this practice this is a hobby in Japan
so I'm not saying that we should all get
into this kind of hobby but again this
repair with gold technique that shows
the how again does sign of the defect or
breakage and a sign of repair that can
add to the aesthetic appeal of the
object not you know it does not
necessarily take take it away and thats
example i have is the
normal tonight which was which was a
source of inspiration for wangari
maathai and when she visited Japan she
really sort of like that concept and
essentially what what it is is that well
you don't throw away things so you try
to make use of even the one italic
fabric and try to make something use it
for very utilitarian purpose repairing
but but then you get this kind of very
sort of interesting patterns it's like a
quilting but this was not a decorative
object it is a utilitarian object and so
so this is really a sign of repair but
nevertheless it doesn't have to be
aesthetically negative and by showing
taking this of the example I'm sure
there are many other examples of a
celebration of our aging appearance and
then taking advantage of the quote
imperfection for aesthetic purpose and
this is just one example because I
happen to know Japanese aesthetic
tradition but by showing this I'm not
saying that well therefore let's create
a new trend and you know do what I call
distressed jeans which sell for two
hundred dollars so that defeats the
whole purpose but rather this is simply
to show how that's the sign of so-called
defect or so-called imperfection can be
made use of in creating something
aesthetically positive and when you
think about it the we are in that sort
of a frenzy of a pursuing the new the
novel the other side is them updated and
so on and in the weights are
self-defeating you know a movement
because you can never achieve it and
whatever new becomes old tomorrow and
and also as a concluding remark that
this whole you know the presentation
really is geared for making us think
about okay what do we mean by object so
there's this object and this is what we
usually refer to us
and what it looks like and and so on and
we usually conceive of this as a kind of
discrete independent entity but that's
where the whole thing sort of goes
problematic can we because if we are
dissociating this dick contact kody
contextualizing this as if that it
didn't have any history and it will not
have any history but rather this is a
you know this object of that we call
object is specially temporally
temporarily relational entity it is in
the middle of you know sort of its own
history and you will continue and
especially this object is not simply
here but it is related to elsewhere so I
think that it calls into question I mean
what should be the notion of object and
what should be the proper attitude that
we should have with the object it's not
simply a thing but rather it's much more
than that so I'm gonna stop there thank
you
so I wanted to thank me she got and
Damien and Ian for inviting me to to be
part of the conversation today I'm going
to show work from three site responsive
engagements one here at RISD and also in
Providence one in the rural Swedish
glass factory town by milla and one from
the from Cambridge Massachusetts
appeared I spent with the Department of
parking traffic and transportation all
of which explore my interest in shifting
the character of labor with in
institutional settings to experiment
with alternate ways of being in the
world within the roles that our bodies
are asked to inhabit in those spaces so
the first one that I wanted to start
with this image is an artifact of it
came out of going on sabbatical during
the peak of the global financial crisis
and trying to process in some ways
during that sabbatical I was spending
time in Indonesia looking at
particularly Balinese Hinduism and
offering practices I was really
interested in in their relationship to
the tourist economy there and the
elaborate ritual calendar as a kind of
attempt to to escape the elaborateness
of existing in a neoliberal society and
I was also processing some things at
home I was talking to my parents a lot
over Skype and I noticed that my father
was checking the performances of his
retirement portfolio on a daily basis
and I was processing of what he was
doing with that information and also
processing the the messages that I've
always received since I started working
here at RISD from the financial planners
who are charged with with
in our our retirement our market
invested retirements are facilitating
our choices amongst the options that are
available to us in planning our market
driven after work lives and I started to
work with this connection between the
notion of the afterlife and the notion
of after work life and to to create a
series of ritual objects to connect to
my retirement portfolio which I was
feeling fairly disconnected from and
these two actually are products of that
engagement so I produced a series of
ceramic vessels and boutiques these are
both based on traditional indonesian
batik designs but they represent the
performance of my tiaa-cref retirement
portfolio over the seven years leading
up to my sabbatical and further they
explore the relationship between when
when engaged in conversations with
tiaa-cref the first thing and most
financial service providers the first
thing that you need to do is determine
to categorize yourself in the world
according to your relationship to risk
which I thought was a very interesting
way of thinking about who we are as
people in the world so the first thing
you had to do is determine your risk
profile and based on that risk profile
that designates what types of assets you
might be a load before I made a decision
during this process that I would make no
no changes within the portfolio that all
my work on the portfolio would go into
this realm so going from the outside in
we can see the the performance of the
very outer LA area is showing the
performance of the dow expressed as
price and volume over the seven year
period of my employment and you can see
the interesting inverse relationship
between those two if you look down here
this is the performance of the dallas
price and volume and here's the copper
stamp that produces that repeat and
moving inwards we have the asset
allocation itself according to how long
one of the most prominent symbols in
indonesian batik it's also seeing other
cultures can find it on the pyramids
moving into
pahang which is the rook good sword one
of the most common motifs also there are
many versions of them in indonesian
batik this one is showing kind of the
this is asset allocation so it's my
myself as a categorical self but
slightly more precise than this global
measurement and here the most precise
measurement the the individual
performance of my of the assets that
make up my my portfolio over the seven
year period coming out of that
engagement I came back back to
Providence and and started working with
a with a company called KLR wealth
management who has offices here in
Providence and in Waltham and in Newport
and I brought them my very modest wealth
and asked them to develop a proposal for
how to manage it and came to the meeting
where they presented me with that
proposal with the counter proposal so
and my counter proposal was to lead a
series of workshops for their staff to
Train to respond percussively to micro
fluctuations in the gains and losses of
their individual retirement assets so to
work with the financial service planners
themselves to to train ourselves to
listen to each other and use the the
form of the djembe drum circle to to to
perform and register these micro
fluctuations of gain and loss in the
performance of our after work life
portfolios I have a video here I'll see
if I can get it to play I don't think I
might need to skip some of it because
it's a like to actually go forward but
doesn't seem to let me
it's okay well we'll leave that one
there it's kind of it's kind of best
actually to leave that portion
unrepresented I think but I worked with
with an ethnomusicologist asheton risa
from brown to develop that that that
workshop and performed it with with all
of the the financial service providers
at KLR in the space of space that they
call lunch and learns which is a space
that's a that's dedicated to learning
changes in the tax code it's important
to me within these works to to to insert
these gestures into these kinds of
ready-made institutional spaces I want
to spend some time now talking about a
project in in rural sweden in hi mila
this has been a it's been a long term
place based research project that came
out of a 2007 Fulbright term there and
I've returned every year since and it's
it's become important within this work
to to to continue to return to a place
and one that really hasn't hasn't
continued to invite me but that that I
make make a commitment to to bring
myself to along this alongside the work
that I've been making there My partner
and I who's also on the faculty here in
the Julian metals Department CC
vestaburg and I formed an artist front
organization there that's been really
dedicated to bringing it has several
functions but one of the important ones
is is to create a space for us to
counteract in some way our work within
more institutionalized educational
spaces like RISD to to really
experiment with and model kind of
counter proposals to to the way that
that learning is structured here
particularly in terms of the economic
models that it's structured on i'm
working on a long-term project here
though that that involves the
development of a conceptual product
catalog and is interested in this notion
of performing labor it came out of being
in the setting and being really struck
by the way that that the factory itself
had been restaged to performative ly
bring the most photogenic performers of
the labor of glassmaking forward the
glass factory itself is is quite
interesting as is the case with many of
these types of of hybrid industrial
tourist sites where in the the workers
are engaged simultaneously in this
embodied craft practice and in the
performance of that labor and the
production of a tourist spectacle and
I've become really interested in how to
insert my own labor as an artist inside
this these systems of manufacturing
manufacturing objects and manufacturing
to respect achill in an already
problematized and implicated way in
order to ask questions of myself and
others about the contemporary status of
the laboring body and to put myself in
the best position to receive the
knowledge contained in those postures so
this is a so this is an image of one of
the tour groups that's coming through
photographing the labor of the workers
and here you can get a little bit of a
sense of the scene at the factory I was
really struck by a couple of things one
that you'll see in the in the in the
upper left corner of this image is a
picture window which was part of a
renovation to the to the store where
they installed a picture window which
had exactly the same aspect ratio as
video at the time to look out from the
from the store on to the factory and the
other was that when you came in when
they brought these tour groups through
the workers had been trained or trained
themselves to not respond to anybody
that was there so the the tour guide
would come through and speak on the on
the microphone about the action that was
happening and the workers would would
continue to perform their work and there
was something about this position being
kind of trapped between in this state of
dual consciousness that I found myself
really drawn to I started working with
various ways of inserting my labor into
this situation the the very first one
was a really simple action where I just
worked with the workers to train
ourselves to make glass without looking
at the without physically looking at the
glass so using just the image of the
live feed camera that I'm holding to to
to make the glass offsetting our vision
just slightly to an image which was
projected on to the onto the heat shield
it's just important to kind of keep in
mind as we look at these images that
they are both images of a process and
images of a further production of a
tourist spectacle as the as these these
projects themselves become consumed by
these tour groups that are that are
moving through so in a way part of the
struggle was with kind of how to insert
and instrumentalize my labor make it
necessary in some way for them and also
insert myself into the position of
producing the Torah spectacle that they
were producing it was interesting coming
out of that project I had a conversation
with one of the workers were where he
said well actually Daniel it was in
to do the work because I don't actually
look at glass much when I'm making at
most the time I just glanced down to
confirm what I already know I'm doing
and it struck me that in trying to
reflect on this situation I had fallen
into the trap of of over emphasizing the
visuality of the spectacle itself I
wanted to come back to this image which
I showed earlier it's actually an
extraction from a from a newspaper
article that documents another project
that I engaged in there that project
began in collaboration with my partner
CC vestaburg where I designed and worked
with the workers to produce a receptacle
to collect their sweat and this object
was produced and then used on the on the
factory floor that's what was then
processed into a perfume and the bottle
for which was produced through a
relational gesture that was also
produced on the on the factory floor and
that perfume in was it was then
installed and inserted back into the the
commercial product line that that was
available within within the factory
store it was a it was priced
prohibitively so it didn't sell it all
yeah so
okay i'm going to not say anything more
about that project so the this is these
images are from from a recent project
where I developed a hieroglyphic
language to communicate with the glass
workers to in some sense more purely
commodify and aestheticized their labor
the typical communication between
designer and and glass blower is through
drawing I was really interested in
abstracting the the actions of glass
blowing into a language that I could use
to to write objects to them they then
interpreted the actions from those haga
lithic writings each in different ways
this is the production of one of them
and again all of this action is
happening as part of both the industrial
production line next the industrial
production line in an undifferentiated
way thus can also participate in the
production of the tourist spectacle
those objects were then inserted into
the glass museum and also here's a few
of them the score for this one it's
these are all the same score the score
reads gather roll blow pinch pinch pull
twist counter twist pull warm in pull
constrict caress drop score cut off I
then reproduced those at at human scale
as a series of labor portraits which are
our featured here I want to talk about
one other project in my time there which
is a public Commission that I did along
with with the CC vestaburg and this one
is is in the forest which we were having
a conversation about over lunch there's
actually no no separation i think
between the factory and the floor
there they should probably be seen as
one thing the the piece is is
essentially a place it's a place off the
side of the road we called the place
Evian forest in Amelia glass and it's
it's a roundabout in the middle of the
forest and and and and and a structure
and inside that structure are a series
of brewing bottles based on the design
for the original object produced at the
factory which was a brewing model and
brewing inside these bottles are
saplings that were given by the lumber
company that owns the forest and they're
slowly dying in a few litres of Evian
water and you can see the you can see
the the that you know as you as you as
you approach the object it breaks down
in terms of its kind of commercial
production and you can see the kind of
handmade nature of the of the of the
tops of them I was really interested in
that site to just in my eye also has a
nighttime state I was really interested
in this in this site as well just in
terms of processing my own relationship
to Sweden which I had really gone to on
my Fulbright a naively as this kind of
like escape from from from from the US
and this sense that somehow maybe there
was something left of the the beauty of
the Scandinavian social state and
somehow that seems to be embodied by the
place as well I remember coming to this
site where i was invited My partner
invited me as part of a group of
international artists who were invited
to to make works in the factory and I
was my first time getting a break from
teaching in a long time
go in the forests and feel so that I was
communing with nature you know and the
mosses were so incredibly beautiful and
even the even the snails were quite
beautiful to me and it took me many
years to realize that this was a garden
you know that men it wasn't just
anyone's garden like that this was a
planted forest and there's an
interesting very simple optical
phenomenon that happens when you
approach these forests whereby they at
first appear or from certain angles
appear to be kind of randomly planted
and then as you move around them you
start to to really see the rose and
there are points at which those rows
really align and points at which they
they break down and I was really
interested in this roundabout structure
as a way of kind of visualizing that
that break down and the objects
themselves do something very similar as
you move around them maybe in this video
too so if you watch the foreground in
the background you'll you might get a
little sense of this phenomenon that I'm
talking about where these moments of
alignment and uh nuh linemen of filter
in and out how am i doing on time am i
okay I also one last project in the no
stop I'm going to close with this this
piece from from the city of Cambridge
Massachusetts nearby this was part of a
project I was invited to make a public
work for the city of Cambridge and I
said that I for the work I wanted to
create a series of parking regulations
and i created a position for an
artist-in-residence at the department of
parking traffic and transport and
transportation and i inherited that
position for a year doing field work
with a number of the the different
members of the of the organization and
then producing a series of temporary
parking regulations
were passed through the City Council and
officially enacted for the period of the
of the exhibition I'm not going to go
into into all of them but I'll just talk
about one that I thought was relevant to
today's conversation this is the US
patent filed in 1958 for an object that
Americans know quite well it's sometimes
referred to as the Denver boot it's a
it's an interesting object that was
actually produced by a man named Frank
maragh who was a violinist for the the
symphony in Denver and also a friend of
a local police officer and we worked
with the design for the Denver boot I
did this project also in collaboration
with CC vestaburg and and designed a new
kind of soft boot that that and a
regulation for the dissemination of that
boot which was a highly idiosyncratic
regulation it was a similar to the the
hieroglyphic glass scores it was
basically the whole point of the
regulation was that it required
interpretive work by the booting crew in
deciding for example whether a car was
within 1.5 inches of its intended
destination and the objects themselves
were produced in as part of the
regulation were produced in the building
where the where the workers came and
where people came to pay their their
tickets and they were produced with the
regulation on display so that people
could encounter the new regulation which
had gone into effect and the objects
being produced here by CC vestaburg and
this is George who was the head of the
booting crew applying one of them they
they circulated as kind of ambiguous
gift annoyances in terms of people's
perception of them and optically the
hope was that they would kind of
produce a similar kind of shift as that
shift in optical shift in the trees
whereby from a distance they would
register as a as a boot and then kind of
transform in your mind as you approach
them but I was really mostly interested
in shifting the character of the labor
of the the booting teams and I'm really
interested in this gesture in particular
which is when booting creuza apply boots
they're they're trained to do it in
pairs and one person's job is to liaised
with the public and then the other
person's job that George is Purdue is
performing right now is to apply the
boot as fast as humanly possible and not
to say a word to anybody who comes and I
was really interested in that kind of
locked in mechanized posture and wanted
to to intervene in some way in the
character of that labor and that was the
intention of this image and I think
that's the end of my time thanks
good afternoon and I thought I also want
to begin by thanking each lall and
Damian and he and for inviting me
although even though I'm a complete
outsider to the design world but I don't
speak as a complete stranger to the
themes of the conference hopefully from
within my own discipline of anthropology
and philosophy or critical theory have
been thinking for the last few years
about what it means to be critical in a
way that doesn't lead only to negations
and how futures might be conceived not
necessarily in the mode of utopia but as
an amour often as an anthropologist
encounters the future through particular
encounters with everyday life and in
specific life worlds so to respond to
the task that this conference sets us in
this presentation I want to offer two
thoughts that have had a long life
within anthropology which I hope might
be useful for thinking about critical
design the first thought relates to the
place that death and the afterlife have
in our thinking in a different meaning
of critical as a state of illness and
being towards death and in the second
thought I want to ask how we might think
about possessions in a way that's
neither private nor common property for
both these thoughts I will be drawing on
my recently published book which in
little al mentioned poverty and the
quest for life which came out just last
month before turning to my own material
oh let me pause just for a moment and
ask are there any models for how
anthropologists might speak to theorists
of design the president I want to begin
with is the recent article in the
journal design issues that Damian had
very helpfully pointed us to buy the
anthropologist Damian gore and Mike
induces in their essay titled designing
environmental relations from opacity to
text ility that resonate that resonated
for me very deeply with a pan
theme of obfuscation an assassin in gold
argue that mainstream design practices
oriented towards producing objects that
alienate human perception from the flaws
in which humans and nonhumans are
embedded the alienation they arguing
occurs through an emphasis on surfaces
that obscure what an assassin in gold
called interest he sees a concept they
offer in place of the more common word
infrastructure with its connotations of
fixity and support affirming design
experiments like the power cord which
draws attention to the variable flows of
energy on which a product depends on
whose ass and in gold are calling for
design to make visible the invisible
processes of flow rather than leaving
the energetic composition of our
everyday lives largely imperceptible so
I want to add to further thoughts to
what an assassin in gold are offering us
while also signaling that the argument
they're making can be seen as part of a
much wider conversation what some would
describe as a turn or return to vitalism
or new materialism as people have called
it in contemporary philosophy composed
of a variety of figures like Jane Bennet
Brian masumi Viveiros de Castro Eduardo
Cunha and others so the new materialists
would agree or have argued from
different vantage points rather than a
secure distinction between animate and
inanimate matter we could say that
humans and nonhumans are composed of
energy we call it force or life force
which is a key of central concept of my
book to which I add the supplementary
concept of fluctuation or i call it
veining life and i will come to that in
a moment and second if you are joined by
energetic lines as an assassin in gold
call it then I'm going to argue that the
lines are also composed to what
anthropologists have called exchange
relations so this might sound a bit
abstract so let me try to bring these
two thoughts closer to life through the
particular world that I inhabited as an
anthropologist so the book that I am
referring to is based on a year and a
half of fieldwork in Shaba a sub
district of 236 villages in Rajasthan at
its border with Madhya Pradesh in
central India my primary focus in this
book is on the Sahara as a community of
former bonded laborers who knows
syst mostly through small-scale
agriculture and agricultural wage labor
rather than focusing only on objection
in the book I seek to understand how
aspiration and vitality is imagined in
such a milieu the question of how one
actually studies aspiration sent me back
too many of the long-standing questions
of critical social science such as how
do the poor encounter the state at an
everyday level or how does a subordinate
group such as the Sahara's negotiate and
contest relations with neighboring
higher castes and tribes but rather than
telling you the answers to these
particular questions since I speak as a
foreigner both by discipline and by
region let me try to take you even
further afield to the world of ancestral
spirits and deities I went in initially
with entirely secular questions but at
some point in my research I realized
that I didn't want to where I couldn't
ignore the gods and spirits that also
populate this landscape at times this
was for culturally specific reasons as
forecast which I found couldn't be
investigated only as a secular question
but once I started thinking about
spirits other questions emerge that were
not specific only to cast or to India
here is an example of one such question
from an early chapter in my book in
which I am following a deity known as
Tucker baba said to be the deified ghost
of warriors who died in battle who
appeared to high and low castes as a
vision of a headless horseman in the
central indian landscape shrines like
these overlap between popular hinduism
and islam and unknown either as we're
warrior or peer ascetic shrines an
active shrine would be approached with
requests for healing or other everyday
troubles that are often attributed to
displeased ancestral spirits while this
phenomena like these might sound very
local to some people such a deity can
also pose reasonably global questions
including a question which I realized
that almost every canonical figure of
social science from Herbert Spencer to
dork I'm to victor Turner to clifford
geertz had tried to answer namely how
can we think of the dead and spirits as
participants among the living
so the possible answer in my own book
following the philosopher shield dealers
I suggest the idea of varying thresholds
of life as a way to conceive of a
potentiality composed of the living the
undead and the yet to be born as
anthropologists in many different parts
of the world have found death may not be
the end of life rather it might be
understood as a movement to a different
threshold which has its own intensities
and life force and forms of movement now
some of you might be wondering why am I
telling you all of this shouldn't I be
telling you about some very cool design
experiment in Bangalore or if we are in
a third-world village and I want to be
critical then I should be telling you
about some major failure of the World
Bank or some equivalent demonic
institution so that we can feel good in
comparison let's say that I like deities
but I don't believe in demons but more
seriously I'm telling you this because I
think that the humble shrine of taco
Baba has a small design lesson or at
least a thought to offer not quite
similar to what you recurse i was asking
us to think about at some point I began
to wonder who designs these shrines most
people in the region pointed me to one
particular family in shabad from the Oh
JA sculptor cast whose caste-based
occupation was to design these
particular kind of memorial stones as
they're called in art history in
preparation to meet them I read many
different essays on the aesthetics of
memorial shrines and prepared very
elaborate questions the sculptor
unfortunately two brothers were not very
talkative our father taught us the basic
design of different deities his
grandfather taught him who knows where
he learned it from the sculptors came no
style or sect or spiritual mystery of
any sort they explained how they
obtained raw material from a nearby
quarry and how price differences between
idols were calculated according to size
and design having received much more
dramatic narratives from spirit mediums
about their possession experiences I was
initially disappointed that the
sculptors didn't have more to say but I
slowly realized that the essential
element of this act of spiritual
creation wasn't a theological discourse
that accompanied
but what we could call a design
innovation of sorts namely that these
shrines are built with an awareness of
their own potential abandonment they
sometimes gain in beauty as they're
abandoned but they also persist with the
possibility of a return of potency as a
spirit medium or a troubled family may
reclaim a shrine I call this in my book
waxing and waning life which is a very
different idea of non-human agency not
as a static vitality or a constant
plenitude but as a fluctuation which
leads me to speculate since we were
invited to speculate is it possible to
think of design as a process oriented as
much to the abandonment and afterlife of
a thing as to the moment of its creation
and use this may be a shot in the dark
but let me go further than of you to
material instances also from my book
where a design problem may be
conceptualized in relation to what I am
calling varying thresholds of life the
instances relate to the two most urgent
material questions in a place like
shabba that present the depletion of the
water table and the sharp decline of
forest cover I first began to think
about water because it recommended as
the cause of the most common inter-caste
conflicts and shabba with water scarcity
having become an increasingly urgent
issue in what used to be a relatively
large forest area till very recently I
found that this emergent water shortage
is directly linked to a dietary shift
seen in many other parts of the world as
well from what are called coarser grains
such as millets food drains to finer
grains such as wheat as a form of
aspiration until a generation ago a
lower status group like this areas and
many other poor across the world a tweet
maybe in the case of this areas once a
year eating wheat now much more widely
available because of what are called
Green Revolution technologies is
considered a sign of upward mobility
since course sir grains are seen as poor
man's food this shift would have been a
very minor chapter in the global
evolution of diets were it not for the
fact that wheat consumes about four
times as
water as millets in a context like India
80% of what a huge uses usage is still
agricultural and according to very
conservative estimates that I followed
her as a result of groundwater
overpumping about fifty percent of the
world's population is set to face some
kind of water shortage by 2030 a shift
that is caused in part by these
seemingly ordinary dietary changes in my
book I use this insight to reconsider
the term quality of life which as I
argue can't be measured only by static
minimum indicators such as calorific
intake as a murchison famously defined a
way of measuring absolute poverty but
rather as the ongoing relation between
varying thresholds of life what's good
at one threshold such as food may create
life-threatening possibilities at
another threshold such as water so in
this sense in the book I suggest that
what it means to be critical in
anthropology and maybe a new socks and
in gold are making a very similar call
for design through their idea of
interest is is what I am calling a mode
of heightened attentiveness to the
relationship between varying thresholds
of life so to return to the question of
afterlife consider a different my second
example the death of a forest the Sahara
has the community on which my book
mainly focuses are officially classified
in the government of india census as
forest dwellers one basi but the term
makes less sense today because most
serious survive through agricultural
labor and there's not much forest left
to speak off importantly though the
quantity of land demarcated as forests
in this area has remained stable over
the last century and a half totaling
roughly forty nine percent of land and
shahabad compared with twenty-two
percent agricultural land with human
settlements villages comprising only
about 1% of shamballa so the perceived
decline of forest is not a comment on
the quantity of land but on the quality
of life in the forest and here the form
of death becomes more locally specific
in botanical terms the forest of shabbat
would be classified as dry deciduous for
us so even in its heyday it wouldn't
have borne a kind of lush Amazonian feel
in my book in a chapter called who ate
up the forest
take up different interpretations of
what it means for a forest to die remote
sensing satellite studies provide one
measure through images and be changing
pictures over time of tree or what is
called crown cover density but this is
only one among other ways of measuring
ruin amongst areas the evidence for
forest decline was not so much to do
with crown cover but rather the
disappearance of many older Richard
species of trees and secondly the now
almost deafening absence of animals a
1962 Forest Department report in Shaba
tells us quote big and small game
animals are found in abundance in chabad
tigers Panthers bears do n quote
nowadays one could travel for ours
through forest land without seeing even
a squirrel I would hear a common lament
in chabad in Hindi or and the dialect of
another place top I danke game re which
translates as day a tapa forest from
which the title of my chapter came
although there are many competing
narratives of cult ability on who they
were who ate up the forest some blame
the commercial felling practices of the
state forest department others blame the
encroachments of middle caste
cultivators in the area others still
blame the sudden influx of pastoralists
into shabad sheep herders and camel
herders from other parts of India
themselves escaping new conditions of
scarcity in many of the other parts of
the country so in many activists in
scholarly accounts and policy accounts
the kind of redemptive alternative to
such tragic resource conflicts
particularly over forests is the
institutional form known as joint forest
management also called community
forestry in other parts of the world
where village level committee is often
in partnership with NGOs are given user
rights over demarcated forest enclosures
for a specific period of time
twenty-seven percent of India's forests
are currently under jfm arrangements and
similar figures in many other parts of
the world after many decades of these
kinds of endeavors being tried out the
initial excitement around community
forestry as a completely redemptive idea
has now very much faded various analysts
and kind of very much like what is law
was saying have pointed out the flaws
that recurrently emerged within these
jointly managed
institutional mechanisms the tendency
towards quick-growing profit oriented
species the short time horizon of
projects often a much shorter time span
then most richer species of flora
actually take to mature and various
forms of contestation that emerged in
such endeavors exactly what is law was
saying if a naive idea of community in
community forestry ignores or sometimes
intensifies local conflicts many of
these drawbacks were visible very much
in the kind of joint forest projects
underway in Shaba during my fieldwork
under a program that was called the one
gen Shakti Cockrum forest people
empowerment program and government
programs often have these kind of very
liberating emancipatory titles 90
forests enclosures was set up in Shaba
then with undp funding and local NGO
partnerships fast-growing jatropha trees
two species of tree very much in favor
in many parts of the world because it's
thought to be that someday we'll replace
petrol in producing biodiesel so
jatropha trees were the dominant
plantation in most jfm enclosures with
saplings supplied by the forest
department as this round of projects
began older jfm forest enclosures lay
scattered with broken boundary walls
memorials to earlier such efforts in
Shaba and this is one such one such
abandoned forest enclosure the new and
old boundaries around these were often a
source of local conflict I would have
forest officials voice a recurring
disappointment with these programs after
the program had been in place for three
or four years the Sahara's don't feel
any app nipun and hindi word for
intimacy or ownership for the forest
enclosures they think of it just as
another source of missouri labor if they
get better pay somewhere else they will
go there so as it happened the community
forestry program was being dovetailed as
it's called in bureaucratic bureaucratic
terminology with a government employment
guarantee welfare scheme wheres areas
tribals were paid a few rupees above the
minimum wage to work in these forests
enclosures a welfare initiative like
this could be read critically as some
scholars have read it as a way for the
government to extract cheap labor from
tribal communities alternatively it
could also be seen as bless
thing as it was for many of the Syria
families I knew as one possibility of a
secure wage amidst very precarious
economic circumstances at least for the
seven-year period that this community
forestry program would run the
government officers lament was not wrong
though and most areas i knew agreed the
community forestry program had not in
any way encouraged a sense of upton upon
which as I said translates as a sense of
intimacy or of a thing being one's own
between forests and so-called forest
dwellers such a feeling may sound very
much beyond the pale or logic of state
policies but this was among the aims
even off the very prosaic national
forest policy of India which encouraged
gfm efforts and I'm quoting from the
India's forest policy court and
massaging it is essential to forest
management that forest communities
should be motivated to identify
themselves with the development and
protection of forests from which they
derive benefits end quote so what might
a sense of identification or ownership
have looked like leaving aside legal
definitions for a moment liberal thought
following lock most famously calls it
ownership of property when labor is
joined to nature but thus areas were
after all laboring in these forests
enclosures but without a sense of up
nipun a feeling of thing being one's own
we might call this a sense of alienation
from the object of one's labors what
would a feeling of non alienation look
like intimacy with things did not as far
as I could make out and I say this after
thinking very carefully about spirits
and deities intimacy with things didn't
hinge on any Gaia like feeling of
oneness with nature by now I'd walked
around enough in forests to know that
the word tree was as generic award as
human no one in the area would say tree
without specifying a further detail
about his jati and word translate
translatable as species or caste
occupation can trees have a cast some
trees are more spiritual like the people
tree often said to be a home spirits a
quality recognized even by
scientific Latin name ficus religiosa
others were more pragmatic the thin do
tree in whose leaf the common BDU a
small cigarette is rolled the well built
and constantly threatened teak sagwan
the Tokra which there's an image of that
provides building material for dwellings
so if these names and trajectories are
defined mainly by the use-value how
different are they from a commodity and
would intimacy be no more than a fetish
they come to a delicate distinction here
or question regarding intimacy's with
things and a thought with which I'll
conclude in studying intra and inter
caste transactions I sensed forms of
possession and exchange that were not
definable as property and hopefully that
speaks to your presentation for instance
amongst areas it said that in earlier
times during marriages in Dini a ritual
of giving and this is lalo already gave
away my punchline but nevertheless in
earlier times during marriage in a
ritual of giving a family would gift
their daughter a sickle use this to earn
your keep they'd say as part of the
wedding ritual we give you jug money
he'll naming a particular Hill among the
many hills in chabad after giving away
the hill the predict that particular
family would not go to jug many hill
together forest produce I take this to
be your form of intimate possession it's
ours if we can abandon it or give it
away but the family didn't own the hill
who owned the hill according to critics
the colonial indian forest act of 1865
that inaugurated state monopoly over
forests effectively broke the link
between humans and forests to quote i'm
quoting a leading environmental
historian still these daily transactions
were possible until as recently as two
decades back which is when most people
in the area date the sharp decline of
forest cover what was exchanged was a
connection to the surroundings that
included the potential to consume it
this dani now rings hollow there is no
longer enough to give now there's
nothing in the forest as many areas
say this lament as i understand it
expresses something like the passing
away of an intimate can this intimate be
revived i take this to be a different
answer to its large question can you
build a school that's meant to be stolen
my answer is yes as long as we replace
the word stolen with the anthropological
problem which might also be a design
problem of the kinds of exchange
relations a thing might create in its
afterlife so that in some is the clutch
of ideas I wanted to I hope to offer
from my own neck of the anthropological
woods varying thresholds of life
exchange relations and a form of
ownership and intimacy that's neither
private nor common property I will stop
but i'll leave you with an image which i
hope might also be food for thought
created by the contemporary artist so
both gupta as the cover for my book that
evokes a world and a thing which for me
belongs to this areas but it might also
belong to the toolkit of critical design
thank you
we have ideas of different ideas of
Labor times of Labor right different
lives of objects and different ideas of
ownership it they might seem
philosophical they might seem historical
they might seem anthropological but
these issues of limits of objects the
times of their existence a time of Labor
these are themes which are central to
design and to whatever when we claim any
shifting these definitions can we think
through these definitions new modes of
operation and new ideas of our
relationship logic so with that I open
up to you for questions if you have any
be a limited time but you can thank you
so much it's very great to hear this
other perspectives also add one debate
that I often have with friends and
people in the BF amf a PhD group is so
is the status of the independent
designer or the artists so coincident
with capitalism and a sense of
individual expression and
entrepreneurship that we can't possibly
imagine the kind of cultural production
that would happen without that
distribution economy so when I hear the
two of you speak I am thinking a lot
about you said for example sculptors I
can hear you
I was very strange does the spirit so I
know this is a broad question but I keep
thinking especially since we're out of
school for example that it has a
glassblowing department that has both
what you could say you said workers i
would say designers or artists and I
keep wondering about any comments you
could make about what you see as the
future of cultural production that is
not necessarily about individual
expression whether it's a hobby or a
sculptor who knows his grandfather
taught his father and that's it or what
it means to say these are the workers
when you engage with glass blowers do we
just inherit our culture and express it
as a member of that culture or should we
continue to think about individual
expression in critical design
I'll maybe I'll address the more I think
you shifted your question a little bit
in the process of saying it out the
initial part had been very daring and
then you shifted it with the end to
individual and this thing but the
initial part that was a during that I
like is it possible to live outside
capitalism or ru or necessarily
implicated in it I'll give a very short
answer and then maybe the others can
address other parts of your question one
part of my question will make you happy
and the other part may not make you so
happy judging by own presentation the
part that make you happy will be I say
absolutely and it depends on exchange
relations and circuits exactly like what
you were describing which are not
necessarily only about capital they are
different forms of capital and we can
create circuits of exchange which are
not independent of capitalism but exist
in a different logic of gift giving and
exchange and all the things you had in
your diagram it to a grid the part that
will make you less happy is that
anthropologists have thought about
exchange a lot and the sort of starting
text for this for us is Marcel Mauss is
the gift famously David Graeber and
others have written about it I disagree
with David ravers interpretation because
they take it to be an anarchist text for
me the most deadly interesting part of
mosses thought about the gift and
exchange relations and independent
communities of it scene is that the gift
is a theory of agonistic exchange and
that's what it's lols point was that you
can go anywhere but the idea of utopia
is dangerous in to some extent even for
us to save ourselves because we
eliminate the agonistic element from our
thoughts will either be disappointed
when agonistic begin a guinness takes
being cultures of contestation that
exchange is also it's not competitive in
the sense of capitalism but it is
agonistic in different senses I guess I
mean III think of these these notions of
artist and designer as cultural
categories that we should make crafts of
you know that we should hold fluidly and
deploy strategically so
we had an interesting conversation at
lunch about the the exchange between you
and the woman who's heading the master's
program where I you know we're saying
well what if the two you kind of
switched positions like as opposed to
being like you know hey if you could
kind of hold the ways in which the kind
of radical anti-capitalist position that
you're taking is also convenient to
capitalism and convenient to your moment
right how might you exchange that was
someone else exchange that position and
I guess that's you know I didn't come to
this attached to to this work attached
to the idea of being an artist or a
designer I came to making work as
trained as an anthropologist and really
found these categories helpful in
allowing me to live more fully and be
the ways I wanted to be in the world
okay um I don't know what I can answer
the question directly but i will share
some thoughts um so it seems to me that
within catalyst of production mode there
is a choice of getting into bandwagon of
the more newer the kind of you know the
cult of the new and so that is part of
the problem but within capitalism you
probably can create some other mode of
production which is not premise upon
celebrating the cult of the new and so
to create a kind of design objective
environment which is not like a frozen
in time but rather it's sort of evolved
so with the
human use and aging process and to
design a kind of object which would
really live with that so I think that
there is a sort of choice within even
within capitalist you know system and I
this is a sort of personal anecdote but
I received this email from a student I
had 14 years ago all of a sudden out of
blue we have not been in touch at all
and he was an industrial designer and he
always an email me several weeks ago and
he said well I'm still thinking about
your class I teach technological
responsibility art and design and and
then he said it's it's becoming much
more and more serious in his mind what
we talked about and he said that he
started out after graduation as a very
successful industrial designer and
working for patty up primarily in
furniture Bombay was a bone based or
sort of high-end furniture and store so
he was very successful and then he was
making sort of commissioned piece and
then soon he realized that he cannot
even afford to get by the stuff that
he's making and then in the meantime he
was also touring all over Asia are
looking at the factories and so on and
then he was appalled by the way in which
that you know cheap stuff is
manufactured under dire conditions in
order to satisfy our consumerism so he
got to the sort of a fork in the road
and he decided to quit and I hope you
know people who need us so design
doesn't take this as it is but but what
he did was that he then went to nursing
school and he's finishing
getting the are a registered nurse
degree and as he is working in the
hospital he realized that more than ever
he said the design is really important
for the nicole the nurse's station in
the workstation that really needs
redesigning to accommodate and make the
work more efficient and pleasant so
that's where he wants to go that he will
work as a nurse but he will bring his
design skills and so that's still kind
of within catalyst system although
you're not really producing capitalist
goods but that's another possibility I
think we're the you know we need
designers we need artists
hello okay um so Damian opened the
conference and one of the questions he
open it with us who are we designing for
and taking into consideration especially
a jaws commentary on the cultural
disconnect in the socially responsible
architecture I was wondering if any of
you could speak to how we can reconcile
making culturally and ecologically
sensitive design and the fact that money
and often space for discourse for these
products on the hands of those holding
an often static and arguably Eurocentric
aesthetic values and ideals some brief
opening towards an LED panel take over
listening to talks I would say it's a
question of engendering up process and a
mode of attentiveness rather than a
solution as long as you can and what
happens in the middle is see that not as
a negative critique but that's precisely
generative productive work to bringing
to surface the complexity and that's
also always contingent you bring up a
new come you address one complexity
relations change and something else will
come up right so ethics if you want to
be ethical or aspire to that ideal it's
not a solution so it's a it's rigorous
struggle and an ingress struggle and one
of the things you have to pay attention
to is even when you say cultural
aesthetic of you you sort of stopped it
right you used like there is a cultural
aesthetic designer needs to address it
and that that sort of makes it static
cultural statics what appears as a
cultural static from a distance you know
is conflicted this class space is all
those intimate intimacy's that rig you
was talking about exist right and then
and those things are also vexing and
winning right so to understand precisely
how do you deal with the dynamism
dual sided pneus often contradictory
conflict conflict tree entities or
relations how do you intervene and work
with that that that I think is this
challenge I'm you can make it static and
simplify it but to pay attention to that
dual sided Nestor like you know you can
solve the problem of wheat or a dietary
problem on one way is going to produce
environmental crisis on the other so all
of them are related how can you produce
a design that can address the ported
solving on the one hand it's solving
something but it's also good using
something something else so I learned
one thought maybe to that that it's
large opening statement was also very
interesting that how do we what do we
think about complexity and it's not that
design has been too abstract or
Eurocentric it hasn't been abstract
enough maybe in the context that at
least I've seen it in my own field work
there was at one point a huge drive in
while I was there as you drove in as you
first came into my where I was doing
fieldwork you saw these very normal asst
one-room gray buildings in the horizon
it was almost like a shot in a tarkovsky
film and I ask somebody initially what
the hell is that it this anomalous thing
and they said it's this World Bank huge
project where every Syria family is
going to be given a pakka home or cement
home and I thought wow that's the design
they came up with it's a one-room box
which was then repurposed imaginatively
by some people but but I would agree
with its lull the problem is not its
Eurocentric or complex but that it
hasn't been complex enough maybe a
handle and certainly we are offering you
some terms for approaching that
complexity within my own lexicon
agonistic contestation agonistic
intimacy would be one way of thinking
that don't approach a place thinking
this is community every space is an
agonistic space so one can understand
the coordinates of an iguana of an eigen
sticks that these are the social
tensions one is approaching here rather
than just this flat community space so
that would be one dominant lexicon and
there'd be other I mean you know yo
you'll find your own answer but mine has
been to situate yourself inside the
problem that's the first thing and from
that position you can you can play and
you can say honestly what you see but
it's not it's without any authority it's
just inside the problem a voice from
within the problem I'm going to reverse
the eurocentric and let me talk a little
bit about Japanese garden here in the
United States so it's a reverse way and
there are lots of Japanese gardens in in
the United States and I've been to
several of them and someone successful
but most of not successful because they
try to really just imitate pine tree
lantern you know the usual suspect and
and I think that many times when I teach
Japanese aesthetic to be getting to the
discussion well what what really is
Japanese garden does it have to help
countries does it have to have lantern
does it have to have you know certain
features that we usually associate with
Japanese garden and my sort of that take
is that no I mean what what needs to be
taken is the principle behind design
whether you are dealing with cactus or
rock or desert and so I think that the
sort of sensitivity to the particular
space the culture and the topography and
what is available and that definitely I
think needs to be taken into
consideration and so that's why many
Japanese gardens here I think you know
do not work even if it may look like
Japanese garden which you find in Kyoto
and it's interesting that the person who
the gardener who did mfa Japanese garden
and unfortunate i don't think it's
really well maintained but when it was
first constructed the gardener a really
well-known gardener who was invited from
japan to design the garden he spent the
first three four months going on the
little airplane go up and up and down
the New England coast and presumably the
only thing that he brought from Japan is
one mountain and everything else is not
not from Japan and so so I think it's a
roundabout way of talking about it but I
think that even if there is a sort of a
Eurocentric design that can be i think
that the certain principle if it's
appropriate can be adapted i think to a
particular culture and climatic
conditions so i think we have time for
one more question let me add on an end
on a negative note yeah
one characteristic of design or it has a
curse the moment you touch anything as a
designer you elevate its value so as
soon as you elevate the well you out
price someone who was already using it
in whichever way for which this that
object was their upper limit so design
itself here it's an antagonism you touch
it it goes and then someone has
subsidized input money to bring those
who are now excluded back to the same
plane where they can use it right so we
presume we don't remember that the
design itself is creates these
antagonism and divisions at it goes up
and as it goes up if you leave it there
it might be the most beautiful solution
but will have its limits right it is
excluding no matter how I design so you
you and that could be your project you
can define it politically either defend
that those boundaries who it's for or
bring those who have been excluded back
into the realm of representation and as
someone else
so all right so okay
I really love you pop yeah
you
