morning thank you all for coming and
welcome to the second day of questioning
aesthetics symposium so we build the
momentum yesterday with three sessions
are followed by the speed participants
dinner at the Grizzly president's house
so we want to keep that energy going and
there are two announcement well actually
31 I do apologize for people who are
here at nine o'clock because the program
booklet says nine but that was a goal
went into a printer before we had to
change it to 915 so on the website I
think you read 915 so I do apologize for
the mix-up of the time but anyway you
are all here and we're going to start so
and the first session unfortunately one
of the speakers Yuri McMillan that plane
was delayed and he won't be able to make
it so I am really really sorry for
missing him so what that means is that
the two speakers have more leeway with
their allotted time and and also the we
can have more time for discussion so and
if it ends a little bit early then we
will break and we can get more time for
a discussion for that second session so
we'll play it by year okay and the lunch
for speakers and chairs the same thing
as yesterday you have to follow me with
the ID that's the only way to get into
the space so so just look for me after
the second session and then we'll I'll
take you to lunch place okay thank you
very much and I will hand it over to a
desk first session a chair and speakers
so good morning everyone my name is
Patti Phillips I'm from Rhode Island
School of Design and again I just want
to spend a say a word of very genuine
thanks to Yuriko and Michael for putting
together such an important and spirited
convening and also thank our nine
presenters yesterday who I thought just
you know established a kind of wonderful
excitement and sort of vibrancy and I
hope that we can build on that momentum
today with our are three panels today
and I have every expectation that we can
I also want to acknowledge the great
audience that we had yesterday which of
course included presenters but also
other members of the public who really
participated in such a lively QA so
again I think we had such a great
precedent from tomorrow to from
yesterday excuse me to keep working on
so I'm we're going to have two
presenters and again I just like to
direct you to your program we won't we
won't be reading their bios or ever but
I hope that you will and we're going to
start with them with an Eton and then
we'll have Maureen Connor and as Yuriko
said we're just going to play it by ear
we'll have a lot to talk about FEMEN
feminist aesthetics and art is a very
big and far-flung topic so i think we'll
have a lot to talk about and i also
think it will align in really remarkable
ways with the next panel on performance
art and aesthetics so so in why don't
you get us started and again thank you
all for being here thank you I want to
begin by thanking Yuriko and Michael for
this amazing conference yesterday was
such a rich day and I learned so much
from all of the presenters I really am
grateful for that and also to RISD for
hosting this and the trans disciplinary
aesthetics foundation this is just
great conference so far y'all are a hard
act to follow I must say so I'm going to
talk about i'm gonna move this but i
don't know if that helped um did i'm
going to talk about something that i've
been working on in a couple of different
papers lately and it's been around for
some time so I'm I'm um I'm a
philosopher and I do philosophy of art
and aesthetics and I also do feminist
philosophy although i also have graduate
training in art history and so it's been
a kind of interdisciplinary thing that
i've been doing but I've moved away from
talking about art recently and I've
moved to a topic that we call body
aesthetics in in feminist philosophy and
in the philosophy of art means but the
topics been around for a while but I
think it's really starting to get more
attention very recently and in fact
there's a very fine volume edited by
Sheree Ervin a philosopher Oklahoma
University that's sorry my water bottles
fall apart um that's coming out on body
aesthetics that has a bunch of really
terrific essays on the topic so it's a
topic body aesthetics that has its home
in the field known as everyday
aesthetics and this is a field in which
our own Yuriko Saito has written a
compelling subtle philosophically deep
book to which I really continually
return and for those of you who don't
know your Rico's book on everyday
aesthetics I think it has so much to say
about so many of the topics that came up
yesterday as well and I don't know she
will recognize the influence of that
book in the topic of body aesthetics but
it's it's really the thing that
motivated me to start thinking about it
and that is a work to which I return
continually body aesthetics is also also
like has a foot in or a home in the
intersection of a bunch of other fields
mostly outside of philosophy including
critical race theory disability theory
fat studies and various aspects of
gender studies including feminism and
trans theory
bodies that extra you Aaliyah in
conversation with and has something to
offer I think also these fields of study
so it's one of these places where I feel
like philosophy is drawing from these
other fields but I think we I think this
is one of the places where philosophy of
art really has something to offer as
well in my own recent work I've become
especially interested in what I call
taste and bodies by which I mean roughly
a person's sense of what makes a person
herself or another person attractive or
unattractive in some way tastes and
bodies is a complex matter for one thing
our tastes and bodies takes as its
object more than just the body strictly
speaking it extends to things like
things that we do with our bodies so
like manners of comportment for instance
the way we care for and groom our bodies
and things that we put on our bodies
like clothing makeup jewelry and other
accoutrements further physical
attractiveness and unattractiveness have
many modalities of which beauty and
ugliness are just too others include and
so here's just a kind of random list of
the other sorts of aesthetic properties
that taste attribute to bodies so for
instance handsomeness cuteness sexiness
chic pneus cleanliness tidiness
fragrance by which i mean pleasant
smelling pneus on the one hand so the
positive values and on the other hand
ugliness dorkiness dumb penis
repulsiveness doughiness dirtiness
unkempt Ness and stinkiness on the other
hand and that's just you know that's an
admittedly incomplete list but you can
tell from that list that taste what I'm
calling taste in bodies is evaluative to
some degree and this is the place I
think we're philosophical aesthetics
which thinks a lot about value and the
role of value in judgment and the place
of value in the world this is one of
these places where I feel like
philosophical aesthetics really has a
lot to offer thinking about these
concepts
now by evaluative I want to be clear
that I do not mean that taste need
involved explicit appraisals of the
worth of the object toward which taste
is directed rather I mean that the
phenomenology of taste is to present its
object as valuable and so worthy of
experiencing having preserving or as dis
valuable and so to be avoided or
discarded or something like that and i
want to say hear the term phenomenology
it has a couple of uses in philosophy it
designates a field of study I'm using it
in this other related sense which is to
think about the experience of taste from
the first person perspective so when I
say the phenomenology I mean but kind of
the what it's like to have taste and
that's the place where I think the value
typically lie so it doesn't have to be
an explicitly you know thumbs-up or
thumbs-down kind of judgment this is one
way that tastes can be important for
feminism and other fields centered on
oppressions that are at least in part
bodily so for instance ableism racism
fat ism ageism and sis ism whether we're
consciously aware of it or not certain
types of bodies bodily features manners
of bodily comportment and ways of
decorating and accessorizing but
accessorizing bodies are pervasively
overvalued in our society these strongly
tend to be bodies of younger thin able
bodied cisgendered persons racialized as
white I'm using the term racialized I'm
saying racialized as white rather than
white to indicate that I I'm not arguing
for it here but I subscribe to the idea
that race that that that race categories
are something we do to people rather
than something that kind of emanate
naturally from persons themselves on the
other hand bodies that do not fit these
aesthetic paradigms especially but not
exclusively bodies that are old bodies
that are trans that are fat that are
disabled or
two persons racialized as black these
are chronically aesthetically devalued
and derogated and i should say
throughout this paper i'm going to use
the word fat and i mean it to be a
neutral value neutral descriptive term
so i'm not using fat as a term of
derision or derogation it's a purely
descriptive term in the in line with the
way people use the term in fat studies
now some people might think you might
think okay so features that typify
members of oppressed groups are
considered less attractive than features
that typify members of privileged groups
still on the whole physical
attractiveness is such a superficial
matter shouldn't we concentrate on
things that really matter like
discrimination poverty and violence my
answer is of course we should
concentrate on these things but we shall
we oughtn't underestimate the role that
perceived physical unattractiveness can
play in these things or the extent to
which perceived physical attractiveness
and unattractiveness have far-reaching
moral psychological social and economic
ramifications so um you know there's a
whole field now that is called a small
field but a very interesting field
called look ism that's kind of at the
intersection of a bunch of different
things but especially social psychology
and there's a lot of evidence now so I'm
just going to gesture at some of it that
people who are deemed to be better
looking get all kinds of privileges that
are completely unearned benefits and
privileges that are completely unearned
and unrelated to physical attractiveness
itself so for instance at one extreme of
the spectrum one extreme of the spectrum
physical attract stream spec sorry I'm
starting over for instance at one
extreme of the spectrum of physical
attractiveness philosophers working in
moral psychology have shown the
judgements about bodily discussed have
historically played and continue to play
a role in demarcating and maintaining
group boundaries by vilifying and
dehumanizing a given out group so a
whole bunch of different out groups has
this discuss has played a role and
demarcating these for instance women of
all colors
Jews blacks disabled persons homosexuals
and trans persons and I think we see
from many of these still today playing
in a Disqus playing an important role
there so historically but all but it
continues and there's considerable
evidence from social psychology that
those perceived as merely unattractive
or even just plain right so you don't
have to go all the way to the negative
side of the spectrum but just being
perceived as plain that these people are
not only less likely to be judged smart
interesting and likeable than those
deemed attractive but those perceived as
unattractive are also more likely to
receive unfavorable treatment in for
instance legal settings are less likely
to be hired and promoted earn on average
lower salaries and so on there are these
really fascinating studies about babies
that are perceived as attractive get
like more cuddling and attention from
their own caregivers and from other
people as well so it starts immediately
and it just lasts through through a
person's life all of this can have
far-reaching and sometimes quite severe
negative consequences for self-esteem
and interpersonal relations and this is
typically especially true for women
finally there's good evidence from
social psychology not only that
perceived physical attractiveness
affects our unrelated assessments of
ourselves and others so there hope
there's a lot of evidence that you know
people will be deemed more morally
trustworthy the more attractive they're
perceived to be for instance so that's
what i mean by unrelated because
obviously your moral trustworthiness is
not related to to how how attractive you
are um so not only that but there but
also that we strong this is important
but we strongly underestimate the extent
to which this is so so there's a lot of
evidence now that this is precisely one
of those biases look ISM is one of those
biases that most people tend to like
strongly disavow and not see in
themselves so if you ask people you know
do you evaluate other people as morally
trustworthy if they're better looking
people say like god
no never not me there's a lot of
evidence that that's that that's an
important part of this bias and this
makes it especially this makes this kind
of bias especially difficult to detect
and dismantle all right so it's a
specially permit pernicious precisely
because it goes undetected and is even
like rationally disavowed by people in
these in other ways people's tastes and
bodies does not merely reflect the
dominant order I think which is white
male ablest ageist homo- fat negative
and trans- taste embodies I'm arguing in
these current papers that I've been
working on is part of what promotes and
maintains that order so that's what I'm
interested in that it doesn't just
reflect that taste isn't just reflective
of a problem its constitutive part of
the problem not all of the problem but a
part of it now contemporary feminist
philosophy and I'm really talking here
especially about philosophy although i
think that one sees this in other fields
of Gender Studies um tends to eschew
considerations of the role of taste in
promoting and maintaining male supremacy
or whatever you whatever your preferred
term is there that's mine I think part
of this issue the issue of taste is due
to a misunderstanding about taste miss
Tanner a misunderstanding that for
instance sally has Langer who's a very
prominent feminist philosopher and has
done a lot of important work in
philosophy for feminism and she also
works on race this misunderstanding
Sally Haslinger expresses in her
important essay so this is an essay
that's won awards and philosophy in is
had had a big impact me sa is titled but
mom crop tops are cute that's a quote
social knowledge social structure and
ideology critique so in this now kind of
famous essay sally has Langer worries
that construing the claim crop tops are
cute that's that's the claim she
construing that as a judgment of taste
would as she puts it not
make room for meaningful critique um but
most and this is this is just one of
those cases where I feel like you see
the disciplinary boundaries within
philosophy um doing really negative
destructive work here because most any
philosopher of art will tell you that
it's a mistake to assume that taste
leaves no room for meaningful critique
in fact like the whole history of
aesthetics has been trying to think
about how we can justify the normativity
of taste that there's a right and a
wrong or a better and worse or something
like that um so you know contrary to the
adage there's no disputing about taste
most philosophers of art think there is
disputing about taste I mean how we
justify it is this part of the project
I'm not saying that that's that's been
completed but I think most philosophers
art think there is some kind of
disputing about taste for instance we
can ask whether our judgments of taste
are properly directed at appropriate
aesthetic properties it's one kind of
question one can ask a different
approach inquires into the morality and
I mean this really broadly construed to
include like the politics what many of
you would call the politics of taste for
instance and this is what my current
projects are about we can critically ask
whether our taste supports or undermined
social justice so that's one reason for
this feminist philosophies a shul of
taste another reason for this issue is
um philosophical feminism's generally
intellectual lyst tendency and I think
we see this intellectual lyst tendency
in other dementias in feminist and
Gender Studies um feminism and gender
studies by intellectual this tendency I
mean a tendency to conceive of sexism or
male supremacy or whatever you want to
call it primarily in terms of people's
misguided beliefs about the two sexes
and of course the actions based on these
beliefs while of course don't disagree
that false beliefs both conscious and
unconscious play a significant role in
sustaining the dominant order I urge
that we give more attention to the role
of the effective life and in particular
more attention to take
East when thinking about various kinds
of oppression after all on most any
plausible account of human action so
there's a field and philosophy where
people try to think about what an action
is and how actions work and on most any
account action requires not just belief
but also an affective component like
desire by which I mean so it's not
enough that I you know believe that
there's a bottle of water on the table
and believe that I am thirsty but I need
also to want the bottle of water in
order to be motivated to act to do it
the belief by itself doesn't motivate
and that's a very accepted thing so the
affective component so this is why i
think the intellectual lyst tendency is
really forgetting something very
important namely the affective component
um of human action so on my view finding
crop tops to be cute or high heels to be
sexy or thin bodies to be preferable to
fat ones or straight flowing hair to be
preferable to kinky wiry hair or trans
bodies or disabled bodies or old bodies
to be disgusting these are all matters
of what I'm calling bodily tastes and
bodies sometimes they bodily taste taste
and bodies one feature of taste and
bodies as with all taste is that it can
be deeply norm discordant and
unresponsive to rational guidance so
what I mean by norm discord norm
discordance is a kind of technical term
but what I mean is and this is true for
all tastes there are my considered
rationally accepted beliefs the things I
believe and then there's the stuff that
I find attractive or desirable and it
very often happens that the taste
doesn't doesn't coincide with doesn't do
what the rationale judgments think they
ought to do I'll explain more about more
of that in a minute but that's that's
what i mean by nor so the discord is
between the norms i avow and uphold and
the taste that i have just think for
example about how effective you might be
at arguing your way in
finding a particular type of body or
bodily feature to be attractive or
unattractive how a successful you sorry
but how successful you ever been at UM
at arguing your way in or out of finding
something attractive alas right would
that it were so to see what I mean I'm
just going to pick this as I am actually
had a different example but I changed to
an example pertaining to fashion just to
try and speak a little bit to the
fabulous papers on fashion yesterday so
to see what I mean let's consider an
example like high-heeled shoes it is
really and truly my deeply considered
view and I've thought a lot about this
that high-heeled shoes are bad for women
in a variety of ways whereas men shoes
are grounding enabling and relatively
foot friendly high-heeled shoes are by
contrast harmful to feet legs and back
and they're hobbling in the sense that
they basically force us to take mincing
steps and are difficult if not
impossible to run in and the higher the
heel the more this is true right to wear
high heels is not only to participate in
but also to promote an aesthetic that
Dominion ties 'as and sexualizes women
their butts kind of stick out more as we
wear them and it's part of adopting a
posture that is seen as sexually
attractive and they're interesting
psychological studies on this that
people actually prefer people both women
and men regardless of sexual orientation
prefer the gate of a woman in high heels
to the gate of a woman wearing you know
sneakers or whatever so to wear high
heels is not only to participate in but
also to promote and so far as one looks
good and other see one looking good and
think hey um to promote an aesthetic
that de minute eyeses and sexualizes
women for these reasons I think we ought
not wear high heels and one might give
similar reasons against crop tops and
all sorts of things just to be clear I
don't mean that anyone should be
prohibited from wearing high heels that
they should be outlawed I certainly
don't think people should be shamed for
wearing high heels on but I do think
if we could eliminating high heels would
be an important and sexually revealing
clothing and stuff like that would be an
important part of eliminating the taste
for these things and an important
component of achieving gender equality
that is what I believe and I will I will
argue all day that point but here's the
rub well I'm fully as we say in
philosophy docs a Stickley committed to
this I believe this I believe this i can
give you reasons and arguments this is
something that i uphold and have written
about and studied and I've got evidence
in the way that a good academic should I
nevertheless own several pair of
high-heeled shoes and I wear them
regularly why well I'm sure you can
guess because I think they make me look
good and I care about looking good and I
care more about looking good than I
actually want to admit because I don't
think that that's something that a woman
should care so much about either to put
the point in a way that connects up with
what i said earlier because i have
developed a taste for heels and when it
comes to making decisions about what to
wear my taste often wins out over my
well considered convictions in fact that
i just had a conversation with jonathan
this morning about you know feeling a
little tired because we stayed out late
last night and I I'm thinking I'm
looking a little a little tired and so
I'm going to put on some lipstick this
morning I don't actually rationally
endorse that either but I did it um and
so and this is this is what i made about
action right the thing that determines
my actions most often are my is my taste
not my well considered convictions at
least not when it comes to like deciding
how i'm going to present myself to you
here today and so i end up embodying and
promoting something that I rationally
disavow now even if you don't agree with
me about heels I think that's fine we
can have that argument later but even if
you don't agree with me about that I
hope you recognize the general
phenomenon and I bet you for every
single one of you there's something like
that in your life with respect to how
you maintain and present your body um
and I hope you can see the why it's
important so this is the kind of thing
I've been working on and I recently
recently finished a paper on fat
negativity for this collection by Sheree
Irvin where I consider the role of
disgust and other negative attitudes in
maintaining fat oppression and
especially to the especially to the
disadvantage of fat women and I've just
started a paper that looks at the role
of cased in maintaining a white
supremacist hair aesthetic that Dara
gates the many kinds of hair that
typically are associated with persons
racialized as black and so this I want
to say that's there's a lot of talk in
the african-american community for there
has been for a very long time about
black hair and it usually is about black
women's hair and you know whether to
relax or not or straighten should they
go natural or you know what sorts of
things are appropriate and that's not
the kind of paper that I'm writing I'm
trying to think about the role that
white people have in promoting an
aesthetic that raises that question for
black women and so I'm trying to think
about promoting what I'm calling a white
supremacist hair aesthetic that values
flowing hair where we're actually I was
just I was just watching a video as a
commercial for Pantene I think and this
hairdresser and he says you know the
great thing about straight hair is the
movement it's all about the movement and
there's I mean this is just out there
you know that the flipping of the hair
and the twirling of the hair and this is
like something that's really valued and
that aesthetic is not one that is
friendly to the kinds of hair that
typify people who are racialized is
black and so then that so promoting that
aesthetic raises a question especially
for black women about whether to go with
it try and achieve it or at great
expense or stand against it take kind of
oppositional stance but position but
what one has the position oneself with
respect to it and the people who are
responsible for promoting that aesthetic
it R Us me so that's what that papers
about and finally I'm working on a
couple of papers on pornography that
consider the way that the dominant forms
of porn by which I mean dominant forms
of Harris
to a porn function to malformed their
audiences erotic taste in ways that
maintain gender injustice now in all of
these papers I'm especially interested
to think not just about how taste
perpetuates oppressions of various sorts
but also to think about how we can bend
our tastes and bodies in the direction
of social justice how can we change
taste for the better and as I've said
already you know the thing about the
norm discordance and the thing about
taste and its norm discordance is that
rational argument is not the way to get
yourself to find a certain kind of thing
attractive you can believe that fat
oppression is a terrible thing but
that's a very different thing from
accepting and even finding fat
attractive on your own body or somebody
else's body hmm so how can we change
taste in this in this direction of bend
it in the direction of social justice so
I've probably gone on too long i'll just
say very briefly that i'm developing an
aristotelian account here which which is
centered on habituation so this is
something that aristotle talks a lot
about with respect to cultivating proper
virtue habituation involves according to
Aristotle and I think this is the right
way to think about it guided exposure to
the thing in question where the point of
the guidance is to ensure that the
trainee as it were the person whose
taste you're trying to change comes to
see the value or the district the
habituation to the thing in question the
thing to which she's being habituated so
this is the way in which Aristotelian
habituation is not like operant
conditioning or something the idea is
not just to get you to like something
but to come to see what's valuable about
it so through habituation one comes to
develop the standing disposition to take
pleasure in the right sorts of things
and displeasure in the right sorts of
things this is something that Aristotle
thought was important to being a good a
good person a virtuous person and to
have those feelings with the proper
intensity in other words I would say
this is in a word the Aristotle uses but
I would say to develop the right taste
for things
I think that um I think this is mostly
how advertising works for instance it's
not just exposure to something but
getting you to see what's likeable about
something and um hitting you with it
over and over again from a whole bunch
of angles that gets you to go from like
you know skinny jeans are into skinny
jeans are out you know highways low
waist whatever it is you know the thing
that you found unattractive last year
suddenly becomes like the most
attractive thing our tastes do change
and that and that's an important i think
habituation is how one of the main ways
that we do this there are others vivid
pictures and this is where my interest
in art history and how images work vivid
pictures moving or still entice their
audiences to have evaluative sentimental
responses to the objects they depict so
by I mean evaluative again in that sense
not not explicit thumbs-up thumbs-down
judgments but the experience of
perceiving something as valuable you
know oh the high-waisted skinny jean
that looks nice that kind of thing Oh to
have evaluative sentimental responses to
the objects they depict and this
directed engagement so pictures are part
of directing ones engagement to the
thing to which one is being habituated
this directed engagement inculcates in
the audience a predisposition to have
the same kind of response to similar
objects in the world so that's my that's
my plan to develop that kind of account
and them that's all I've got thanks for
listening
sorry about that I just wanted to let
you all know just so you don't get the
wrong idea about me that I forgot my
makeup this week this weekend so if
you're thinking that on somebody who
doesn't normally wear makeup that's it's
not the case so yes and I just hate it I
hate it back what am I gonna do I
couldn't I haven't had time to go buy
any so that's there you have it um this
is me okay um so I first want a second
dance enthusiasm about the conference
and about being part of it again thank
you too Yuriko and michael for inviting
me i'm really honored to be here and
I've learned so much again to echo and
from all the presentations yesterday and
also to speaking with everyone between
and around the formal talks I hope to be
able to discuss some more of these
issues further today so for my
contribution I would like to tell you
about two interconnected projects i'm
working on which i hope can properly
represent my perspective on on critical
aesthetics in relation to feminist art
specifically to go back to a question
that Jonathan masket raised yesterday in
reference reference to fashion I want to
bring up the question of should certain
things be made at all so I'll begin with
stressing that like some of the other
speakers these projects that i'm showing
you today or completely works in
progress so the first work the speculum
project is a collaborative effort among
for women to rethink and redesign the
vaginal speculum used by medical
practitioners for women's pelvic exams
for those unfamiliar with pelvic exams
this is what goes on
so okay so the vulva uterus cervix etc
okay that's that's what a pelvic exam is
meant to explore so this project was
initiated during the creative time
summit in November 2015 in workshop
conducted by sim-only on the subject of
women's health at one point in the
workshop the artisan obeah bailey
announced that she was interested in
working with a group of women to
redesign the speculum so three of us
responded so that's Zenobia great
Zenobia let's see what some of the
initiators of this conference know is
that sim only was originally scheduled
to be part of this panel so since she
wasn't able to come it seems right to
present a project that she helped
initiate for me my work on this project
actually began last spring well before
the Creator time summit when I first
discovered dr. James Marion Sims who is
known as the father of gynecology wait
one more thing I just I wanted to tell
you the other people who were on the
part of the group so it's synovia
Jennifer wager who is a video maker and
educator Erika cumani who is a an artist
and also works at eyebeam in Brooklyn
which is a center of Technology okay so
so anyway I was working absolute gems
Marion Sims who's known as the father of
gynecology while doing a project that
about the monuments that's around the
state capital in columbia south carolina
in this is the same location from which
the confederate flag was removed last
July after the massacre at emanuel
african Episcopal Church in Charleston
and I'm sorry I'm forgetting the name of
the woman who's taking this is the woman
who took the flag down
her own and was arrested for it and I'm
sorry I'm forgetting her name does
anybody remember it anyway I'll make
sure I get it to everybody later so
since dr. Sims was born in South
Carolina he merited a post
Reconstruction era monument along with
other pros slavery or white supremacists
and leaders such as Ben Tillman oh oops
oh yeah that's that is some the Columbia
monument for dr. James Marion Sims this
is Ben Tillman who's the father of the
Red Shirts organization that was the
inspiration for the KKK and the more
recently added Strom Thurmond I soon
discovered that Sims also had a monument
in New York on 113 fifth avenue across
from the new york academy of medicine
and just down the block from Mount Sinai
sins notoriety is based on the surgeries
he performed between 1846 and 18-49 on
at least 14 Alabama slave women without
anesthesia some some women were operated
on dozens of times before he reported
success these surgeries were for the
repair of vaginal fistula 'he's tears in
the vaginal wall causing the contents of
the bladder or colon to leak into the
vagina producing infection and odor
usually resulting from obstructed
childbirth or sexual violence fistulas
are common internationally where there
is limited access to health care
especially prenatal care the effects of
the fistula frequently result in chronic
pain and in some communities social
ostracism Sims was the first position to
successfully repair fistulas and shortly
after his first successful operation in
18-49 he moved to New York and a few
years later opened the first hospital
for women in the United States while
Sims was a venerated
physician in his time his legacy is
controversial and represents a
significant chapter in the mistreatment
of african-americans by the medical
establishment while historians ethicists
and the popular press have debated dr.
Simms legacy medical sources have
continued to portray him unquestionably
as a great figure in medical history
this division keeps the medical
profession uninformed and detached from
the public debate on his legacy and thus
the larger issues of ethical treatment
of all patients particularly how they
have impacted and continued to affect
the poor people of color and women stems
history is an important part of the back
story for the speculum project so before
I continue without I want to tell you
briefly about the sims project that I
have related to Sims which is titled
discontent discontent was developed by
my collective the Institute for wishful
thinking it proposes a long-term
approach to the possible redesign of
Sims monument navigating both the East
Harlem community boards desire to remove
the statue and some historians and
public health experts wish for the
statute to remain but with altered
signage community leaders have also
suggested constructing an alternate
monument honoring the three slaves who
are stated by name identified by name in
Sims medical records Lucy an ARCA and
Betsy all of whom underwent multiple
surgeries the current inscription on
sims monument ignores all of this grim
history instead emphasizing his status
at the time as the world's leading
authority on women's reproductive health
discontent then it's a public art
installation and a series of events and
engagements focusing on sims
controversial monument and with an
effort to reach the community the
project will first appear as part of
mounts ionized Community Health Fair an
event dedicated to improving the health
of residents in East and Central Harlem
side by side with
Mount Sinai nice free medical services
discontent will create a large tent I
emphasize 10th the 10th in discontent so
I don't really have any images of that
yet but the idea is to hide the monument
while at the same time providing a space
to meet and discuss the issues it
creates in the tent will present
readings by harlem liberation theater of
joseline hugely McLaughlin's
award-winning play the silver thread
which is based on sims 1840s experiments
followed by discussions about ethical
medical research practices discontent
will then invite suggestions for the
redesign or reframing of sims monument
we will discuss what monuments are for
what makes a successful monument as well
as how the residents of East Harlem feel
about having this structure in their
neighborhood subsequent readings of the
play and monument redesign workshops
will be presented in conjunction with
museum mile festival in june and
national women's health day in September
will also include a reading and
discussion by ob/gyn faculty I hope and
medical students together with female
members of East Harlem outreach
partnership they will be the play the
silver thread together and then have a
group discussion led by the medical
historian Harriet Washington the author
of medical apartheid the dark history of
medical experimentation on black
Americans from colonial times to the
present it's a great book so how does
this connect to the speculum in fact
Sims considered himself the inventor of
the speculum although examples from
ancient Rome still exist let's see
wait a second getting ahead of myself
what was that sims didn't improvise for
productively for some practical use the
writer and anthropologist Terry cut
solace put it very well in her wonderful
book public privates performing
gynecology from both ends of the
speculum when she said if this is the
father of gynecology we need to rethink
the field of kind of ecology and one
primary place to begin this rethinking I
would say is with the speculum probably
almost any woman in this room will agree
that vaginal exams with the speculum are
among life's more uncomfortable
experiences on the other hand for the
sake of full disclosure I will tell you
that I did find several blogs that
discuss the use of the speculum as part
of sexual foreplay speaking of tasting
bodies taking this as a kind of reversed
inspiration we've also been looking at
the materials and structure of sex toys
as a way at the very least to make the
speculum less sharp edged and inflexible
in fact one of the most striking aspects
of this research has been how much
energy has gone into the design and
development of sex toys and so little
has gone into the into making the
speculum more comfortable in dr. Sims
memoize he claims the first version of
the of his invention was improvised the
speculum talking about the first version
was improvised from a bent kitchen spoon
but this is the official you know Sims
speculum I'm still not totally clear how
it works but Sims invention has since
been transformed into the modern
speculum and this is the the transparent
plastic speculum with attains a light
inside and it's disposable you can see
there are three sizes
but anyway his his invention has since
transformed into the modern speculum
which disturbingly still retains some of
the elements of the speculum device used
in ancient Rome speaking of object as
witness we've also looked at the range
of existing speculums the patterson
speculum has the flat narrow design I'm
sorry that's that's not not this bad
Patterson this is Patterson Pettersen
speculum has has a flat now a design
that is meant to accommodate a narrower
vagina these speculums are advantageous
in younger women virginal women or for
women who have never given birth as well
as elderly women and then go back to
write the grave speculum has a wider
blade and their sides are also curved
these are generally used for women who
have had who has given births once or
more one or more times as you can see in
both cases there is a raid range of
sizes which is something that I never
even really thought about until I
started this research because nobody
ever asked me you know if I needed a
smaller size or you know if I was even
comfortable so what I one of the things
I found out was since dr. started using
the transparent plastic throwaway
speculums they pretty much just order
like a huge quantity of mediums and
that's kind of what they have on hand so
there are however no references guiding
examiners in their choices speculum size
vaginal length vaginal width and the
size of the vaginal opening vary
significantly depending on race
ethnicity age and height linear vaginal
length varies in ranges from 41 to
ninety five millimeters measuring from
the external opening to the cervical
opening in addition to these normal
variation
volvo vaginal anatomy and physiology may
be altered in a number of clinical
circumstances such that the tolerability
and ease of speculum examinations are
impacted significantly an appropriately
sized speculum should be chosen to
accommodate individual anatomical
features some alternative speculums have
been invented over the years ranging
from cylindrical speculums two
inflatable speculums and a number of
different inventions have been
prototyped and abandoned meanwhile
research continues to demonstrate that
pelvic examinations are considered by
most women to be unpleasant and are
routinely associated with embarrassment
apprehension fear and often some level
of discomfort or pain ultimately the
modern speculum betrays Sciences
disinterest in Women's Center technology
so as our design group looks at the
various textural and functional aspects
of speculum design we still find
ourselves asking why in a society so
technologically advanced that we can
replace a hip joint and send people to
space why is it that we haven't invented
a better speculum while comfort is not
generally the first thing designers and
medical instruments have considered over
the centuries generally speaking that
they were doctors improvising and
although there is by now in the 21st
century many techniques to avoid or
ameliorate pain patient discomfort
generally does not seem to be the
primary goal for medical practitioners
in any activity at the same time until
recently men have dominated the medical
profession to such a degree that the
specifics of women's bodies and their
health remained a low priority for way
too long but this neglect pales next to
the failure to develop treatments for
the medical problems that afflict
african-americans first by creating a
myth about their reduced sensitivity to
pain which was Sims excuse for failing
to anesthetize the women he operated on
next by failing to understand the impact
of the stress of racism on the
south of african-american women to the
point that infant mortality rate among
black infants is 2.4 times that of white
infants primarily due to preterm birth
in Grand Kester's talk at the
questioning aesthetics conference in
Berkeley last spring he summarized the
philosopher and poet Frederick
Schiller's ideas about how aesthetic
experience played a central political
role in early modern philosophy and I
struggle to I watched it is on video he
did keep it within his 15 minutes but it
was about the densest 15 minutes I've
ever listened to but I I really wanted
to understand it specifically because
Custer suggested that these ideas that
the aesthetic experiences relation to
politics continues to inform aesthetic
theory today so I really wanted to
understand it so before I go into my and
I just want to go a little bit I can't
let this go whoops where did I go yeah
all right I can't let this talk and
without showing Annie sprinkle who in
the late 80s and early 90s did
performances which she called the public
cervix announcement which meant that as
part of a performance she would put has
put a speculum in her vagina and have a
flashlight invite everybody in the
audience to come up and look at her
cervix so that was you know working from
the other side of of the of the field so
to speak to try to demystify and I don't
know how to put it change people's
tastes body taste in relation to women's
parts in the vagina and so
I just wanted to show you the survey
that we've put together doesn't seem to
be coming up anyway I was hoping that I
would be able to give you a link for the
survey today but it's still not totally
ready to to be disseminated but I would
certainly love to send it to you if
you're interested in taking the survey
women only I'm sorry it says it's a
survey about your experiences 20 thanks
it's a survey about your experiences
with the speculum over time I'm also
asking questions like has the doctor
ever asked you if you were uncomfortable
or suggested that you might use a
smaller out to eat that she or he might
use a smaller speculum or also there are
different positions that women can take
anyway so if you're interested please
come to me either give me your email
later or I'll give you mine and I'll
make sure that you get the link when
it's finished so um back to kester and
the idea that aesthetic experience
played a central political role in
philosophy aesthetic experience in both
Schiller's time and now according to
custer as his his summary of this is
meant to perform Amelia to meliorate if
work pointing out that in Schiller's
view political change is merely the
mechanical or pragmatic extension of the
real work of social change which only
occurs again according to Schiller
through the singular incremental
transformation of the subject at the
level of individual consciousness
however kester goes on to suggest that
we now need to recognize the efficacy or
agency of the practice of reform the
political as itself being constitutive
of subjectivity and capable of
transforming subjectivity and agency in
meaningful and revolutionary ways I hope
I hope that's clear
he then explains that a central concern
of his own research is to understand how
the form of critical self-reflection for
a critical self-reflective insight that
we have come to identify with aesthetic
experience and which certainly is seems
to be the mandate of this conference and
the whole enterprise of Michael's
research and and the encyclopedia so
we've come to identify critical
self-reflective insight that we have
come to identify with with aesthetic
experience can be produced in contexts
and through forms of cultural social or
institutional framing quite different
from those we associate with
conventional works of art so I would
like to conclude with where I began
asking again Jonathan's question should
it be made and added adding should it be
funded should it be shown and then asked
what needs to be made what needs to be
funded and what needs to be exposed
thank you
okay thank you very much and in murine
these were really wonderful challenging
exciting presentations and also a lot of
interesting intersections here if you
can explore and I guess I just wanted to
add a little a little bit closer okay
yeah and I just wanted to bring in a
little bit of context that I've been
thinking about and I'm in the process of
finishing a book on an artist named mara
later- glee's and on in a couple of
weeks carolee schneemann will be coming
to lecture at RISD and it just made me
sort of think about these two remarkable
and legendary women both born in 1939
contemporaries and where we sort of come
from thinking about feminist art and
aesthetics in maybe the past 40 to 50
years and I was going back and reading
Connie Butler's really wonderful
introduction to the book whack and the
exhibition that accompanied it and she
writes during the 1960s and early 70s
feminism fundamentally changed
contemporary art practice critiquing its
assumptions and radically altering its
structures and methodologies but what
exactly is feminism and following that
what is semanas art Peggy phailin
failing has offered what seems to be the
most serviceable definition of feminism
and I quote the conviction that gender
has been and continues to be a
fundamental category for the
organization of culture moro moreover
the pattern of that organization usually
favors men over women end of quote
Butler goes on to write gender was and
remains fundamental to culture and that
a contemporary understanding of the
feminist and art must necessarily look
to the late 1960s and 70s so it's been
very interesting to sort of think about
this kind of arc as we think about
feminist aesthetic and feminist art and
just too I mean what I was felt so
compelling about both of your
presentations is that you know looking
at sometimes the kind of difficult and
challenging sort of contradictions that
we live with in terms of ideas of taste
but also both of you underscoring so in
such an important in significant way
that these are these are really key sort
of structural and fundamental issues
that have to do with questions of equity
and its disparity and whether we're
talking about the social the economic
the political and how the two of you
were able to sort of you know again kind
of work lives along that kind of we have
the sort of historical axis of the 60s
1960s to our current day but then this
other access of how how this becomes
kind of a lived and embodied kind of
experience for all of us so I found that
really really important and remarkable
in your presentations and I think I also
wanted to just mention I was some
revisiting an essay that Shannon Jackson
had actually written about the work of
Meryl later- police called high
maintenance and and now it's also in
some of the other essays in that
particular collection of Social work's
is she writes about a kind of aesthetics
of conviviality and really focuses on
the social and I guess I was really
struck by that also I think in your
presentations that there is a kind of um
there's there's there's a social
dimension of the aesthetic and I think
it's maybe remarkably important when we
think about you know feminist aesthetics
and and art so I don't know those are
just things that I've been thinking
about maybe even in advance of this
panel but also found your presentations
very vivid in terms of bringing those to
the forefront again so I I guess I would
want to just to get things started
did either of you have anything that you
wanted to say about each other's
presentations and the kind of topics of
research to our judges loved Maureen's
presentation that was so interesting and
I will just say I've never been asked
what size speculum I would like I've
never been asked if I was comfortable I
think it was just assumed that wasn't
there you know I I would be curious to
know I mean I I really like my
gynecologist or I did she's never she's
never inquired and I've just taken it
for granted as you said that it would be
an unpleasant experience and um and
you're lying if you really love the idea
of putting various kinds of sex toys up
there and it really has been so much
innovation you notice that I have a
friend in Chicago who um who runs a
women oriented as she would say but guy
friendly sex shop and and she comes and
talks to one of my classes and she
brings a whole bag of vibrators and
dildos and and one of the things that
you see in the industry now is really I
mean some people still prefer the like
penis shaped thing but but I mean what
you saw there is it's really moved away
from that people have been thinking a
lot about women's pleasure and not
modeling it on you know heterosexual
intercourse or whatever and and so
there's been all this innovation and in
materials and and and I think I i think
i think i get the speculum bed you know
my mother god i don't get the plastic
one with the first he's gonna fit me get
back but I mean I think it's just what I
loved that you've got anything about
this so much it's really important and
once again at this conference I just
feel like I'm being forced to think
about something that I
really had not I'm ashamed to say I have
not given consideration to but is so
important hi also found your talk really
fantastic and thank you and I mean I
it's so relevant to that to some of the
talks that took place yesterday and the
whole question style you know and so
thats style and taste you know or are
these have two modes that well somebody
who has taste of course again it's a
class thing and a kind of cultivation
but then of course there's an thai style
you know which which goes back to the
anti setting you know which in some ways
this conference is you know in dialogue
with so you know i mean i think it's
really interesting to try to open those
questions up I wonder about you know how
do you actually produce habituation
because I'm thinking of like film like
the Clockwork Orange you know and that
was that was a kind of a situation right
um I mean how do you do it in a in a
more you know yeah user-friendly
socially acceptable so I do think of
advertising and pornography as two
really good models of ways to get one to
find something so I'm a thing whatever
it is whether it's a practice or an
extended object or anything to get to
get one to see the value in something to
find it attractive or unattractive I
mean there's
lot of situation that goes on you know
and it happens and it happens in movies
and all sorts of places you know just
you know finding fat people to be
ridiculous which is a kind of aesthetic
judgment right you just start thinking
about all of them movies in which fat
people are represented and ridiculous
and we're need to laugh we're humor is
an aesthetic response in it and that's
right older women also oh yeah
absolutely I really and I really wanted
ageism to be an important part of the
categories that I'd like to continue to
think about their right or you know or
unattractive people that we consider you
know are not conventionally attractive
are often also the jokes and amazing TV
I mean do you think do you think that
visual art could have an impact on this
or do you feel like it's got to be more
in popular culture I mean I think um and
if that's a great question it's
certainly where my training began and
the kind of thing I think about and I
like to think about artworks that you
know isetta size and a positive light
aestheticized you know fat bodies and
trans bodies but I do think that you
know artists typically something that is
available mostly to people with a
certain class and educational background
and I think advertising has a much
broader impact on people and as does
pornography again you know I would like
to think that art matters in that way
but I don't think realistically these
these things that are just ubiquitous
you can't get away for
are the things that really have the most
impacted so those are places where we
need to see aesthetic cessation of so
but how do we intervene you know I mean
should we go try to get a job in
advertising and this I think this gets
back to something that Jonathan said in
his presentation yesterday that it it
can sound like I'm advocating individual
strategies but the strategy has to be
systemic it has to be at a broader level
and and and that's it's hard to know
exactly how to intervene there I mean I
don't work in advertising myself saying
I want to write so yeah right but I mean
I think that's where it has to happen
I'm not sure how to how to how to get
that to work you and this I just want to
simply say that I think you know what is
really interesting to me that when you
put together sort of feminist or an
aesthetics is sorry when you put
together feminist art and aesthetics
it's that I think it really does open a
very interesting sort of conundrum in
terms of ideas of influence and
inflection focus but also how it's tetex
kind of disturbs ideas about feminist
art and defend the experience that we
talked quite a bit about yesterday so
why don't we start to take some
questions from all of you I have the mic
so I guess it's my turn um thank you
both so much that was really fascinating
i have a question / marine i'd love to
hear you say a little bit more about
your the role of research and especially
how research for you is a kind of
feminist practice or methodology and
yeah not not just maybe the
collaborative research that you're
undertaking with a speculum project but
in general how uncovering stories are
telling your narratives or really
intense focus on
a kind of scholarly project is actually
folded into your artistic making well if
I always like to say I'm just pretending
to be an intellectual so you know like
it's like what I always sort of like
when I was first going to go into art
school I I was thinking well maybe I'll
I sort of like to write maybe I'll be an
English major but but then the pleasure
was really in making objects uh of
course now look what I do you know I
research and i right you know it's like
how did I ever get here when I started
out you know kind of issuing that
position but I don't know I mean
it'sit's are you asking me how it
happened or I'm not sure exactly how to
answer you hear more about your own self
conception of yourself as a feminist
researcher okay yeah well i mean i'm i'm
pretty much addicted to the internet um
you know so uh and since I I I stopped
teaching at the end of two thousand
fourteen uh you know I've been really
overindulging I have to say but but the
but the good part of it is that i can
read things so like when you and you
sent the connection to the what was it
the i'm going to forget that the other
essay that you connected us to the crop
tops are key right so i read the whole
crop tops are cute thing um and you know
it's like the kind of thing you normally
don't have time at the ministry center
yes um but yeah but i mean if the
problem is how do you pull it all
together you know I mean that's always
the big problem for me I could I could
research you know 24-7 for you know
years and be so happy but when it comes
to have
an assignment like this that's when it
gets really difficult and of course
that's the challenge and that's that's
really the reason you're doing it right
that's that's the reason I'm exploring
all of these things because I I want to
uncover materials what does how the
Collin I mean aspects of oppression
aspects of the hidden issues things that
are taboo and and try to find ways to
expose them to the public but also
hopefully to to ameliorate them somehow
you know and so you know it it I mean
like when I discovered Sims well I feel
like that my whole experience in
starting in South Carolina last spring I
was my first big shock was I'm i'm
driving a car in Columbia South Carolina
I'm on Confederate Avenue like
Confederate Avenue are you kidding you
know what about fascist Lane I mean how
is it possible that that these street
names and and and then the question for
me if at the same time was ok here are
these monuments probably not that many
people who live here I even know what
they are because i think the indicates
of the monument for example the sims
monument in New York people just walk by
they don't know who it is they don't
know they don't know who he is so so so
my question what that was does it matter
and it does it does it makes make any
difference to try to do work around this
oh is this something that's really
necessary or you know are there other
things that need more that more in need
of change then then you know sort of
raising consciousness about monuments
and and so then I started to it when I
started to explore african-american
women's
oh and I realized that the problems of
stress and that there were many studies
done around even very educated upper
middle class african-american women
there is still this high percentage of
early births and and infant mortality
and so that took me to understanding
what where was this coming from because
of course the research initially said
well probably the african-american women
you know were very poor they didn't have
good health care they they didn't have
time to deal with their help when it
turns out that was not the case then it
can only be attributed to more stress in
their life so like that kind of research
of like one thing after another and
finally finding an issue that kind of
explains you know that the significance
of of the research on the monument okay
so could these things be a part of
stress it's stressful life of the stress
and it stresses in the lives of black
people in you know in New York and and
so I don't know if that answers your
question but it's kind of like looking
and looking and looking for a
justification for something that I not
sure it matters and then finding out a
way to make see that it does matter I
want to just add to that can i add
really quickly then I was born in
Richmond Virginia and although I grew up
in California I would go back to visit
my relatives in richmond and Richmond
has Monument Avenue and it's a very
important thing to people who live in
Richmond monument avenues like the big
cobblestone place where there it's just
lined with monument Confederate
monuments to confederate heroes and one
monument to Arthur Ashe which really
upset people and ever
my family said well it's not about his
being black it's it's about you know
these are confederate heroes and and a
tennis player doesn't belong though that
it was pretty clear that are their ashes
racial racialization as black was an
important people I think lots of
southern cities have Confederate oh yeah
but boulevards want that you know it was
part of a post-reconstruction like sort
of reestablishing supremacy yeah it was
a very like concentrated effort okay
first of all I'd like to say how much I
enjoyed your two papers and they were
very accessible to I mean I thought the
conference from philosophers it would be
very difficult to understand but you
both made it major papers very clear but
I have a comment for an about look ISM
and I was at a psychoanalytic conference
some months ago and there was a person
working on the evaluations that students
give their professors at the end of a
course and her research was very
interesting because there are those
inexplicable zhan those things and what
have I done now and what and her
research showed that for that this may
be no surprise to anybody who's teaching
in an academic institution but that the
reviews for women and people of color
were significantly lower than for white
men and and the worst the worst possible
capacity for a professor to be the worst
possible look would be to be a woman of
color and those were the ones who got
the poorest evaluations costing them
sometimes their jobs so it's not as
though these things have no consequence
in real life but that people people's
careers are wrecked on these things
and it's and it's basically has to do
with how a person looks yeah there's
been a there thank you for that comment
there's been some really i mean if
anybody would like i can send you links
to things and articles and such has been
some really good work recently about
empirical work about teachers
evaluations and I think you know many of
us know anecdotally um that this is that
this happens I get lots of comments on
my appearance in my student evaluations
I mean to the point where sometimes I oh
yeah yeah I I think that's really really
common that you know something about
about my appearance um I have a good
friend my first job was at Bucknell
University which is a teaching a liberal
arts college we're teaching really
matters a lot and so the student
evaluations matter a lot now I met a
research institution and they they
matter a lot less for promotion and
tenure but at a teaching University that
are quite a lot in my experience and I
have a friend who's a fat white woman
who didn't get tenure because of her
teaching evaluations and she was in a
different department we I had seen her
teach but i had seen how much time she
put into on her students and she was
there like five o'clock you know office
hours and working with them she was in
classics and I mean she seemed like a
really amazing dedicated very capable
teacher but her evaluations were always
bad and they often said things about her
body and and she didn't get tenure and
she left academia because she didn't get
tenure because of the evaluations they
told her it was because her evaluations
for six years were just so bad but yet
you're right also hits women of color
especially art I guess I have the
microphone neck so I'm thank you so much
I mean I
cuz I could second third fourth whatever
I feel like I was just blown away by
your papers and I really rethinking a
lot of things especially I'm really
rethinking helping me really rethink the
question of aesthetics and the
relationship to art so I really really
appreciate that and I wanted to kind of
just point out maybe some sort of
different approaches to the question of
aesthetics that I recognized in both of
your papers and wondering how they might
kind of come further into conversation
well first of all the one with the focus
on taste embodies as a relationship to
look ISM and and you did a beautiful job
I think and of a kind of making us
understand how much that is not a
surface question thank you and then then
similarly Maureen your interest though
you actually you never I don't know if
you ever really use the word aesthetic
in your talk you did you did okay but I
want to kind of put a plug in for oh
wait that's the wrong way maybe for how
integral the question of aesthetics is
to the speculum right because but it's
not the aesthetic of how it looks the
aesthetic of how it feels and this is
really the area for me that and probably
why women's bodies are just not
considered unless it's a sex toy in
terms of this question of the tactile
the touch the feeling that is internal
and this is like Lucy a gray the
speculum of the other woman and where
she makes point of the speculum is like
this the specular like this way to look
inside of the body by a male observer
right could you know traditionally the
male gynecologist so there's an
interesting kind of look ism whose look
who's feeling diff
sense of aesthetics that are kind of
operating across the two of these papers
now it's just may be wondering if we
could think about that and I wonder then
maybe I was like well if you're to
redesign this speculum like I would hope
that no men had any part in that
redesign but they were not part of the
designing its look or it's whatever I
mean yes they can put things somewhere
but they don't necessarily have this
experience as medical experience and you
brought up the blow-up thing or whatever
anyway but thinking about the aesthetics
as in the touch is Anna sensible
experience of that instrument which is
what it is really is a kind of real
major paradigm shift potentially and how
women understand themselves right so
it's not just how they have put on
makeup or wear shoes or whatever and
again not to dismiss that because of
course that's onion yes I do too right
even this despite my leaf firm belief
that i shouldn't have to wear makeup I
still do right anyway but this is also
something that I think really is really
going to be key in terms of thinking the
field of aesthetics and I'm not coming
from the field of philosophy aesthetics
but it's someone who do an aesthetics of
touch which is of course been completely
unfortunately with in the history of
aesthetics and philosophy just so
totally at the bottom of the we don't
think about that that animal thing you
know that is touched if someone could
really engage that I wonder how much
that would help so maybe both of you
could speak to that I just want to UM I
was gonna say put in a plug I I want to
again refer everybody to uri coast book
on everyday aesthetics which is one of
the places where this gets
about in our field and also Carolyn
korsmeyer kor SME ye er has written a
book about discussed and is now
currently working on touch as one of
these and she's kind of the Mon bomb of
feminist aesthetics and has written
various other things that I could refer
you all to but she's she's currently
working on a project about touches this
deeply underappreciated sense that would
be so great to bring in a conversation
with this I so agree that's a really
good point yeah well I mean I think
we're you know site is just dominant and
I did a project about 20 years ago about
the senses and ultimately it was it was
really everything ended up being visual
even though there were other components
to all of the parts of it and so you
know i mean it's it and that's a
certainly a very calm and it's a male
perspective on feeling the world of
course we're all focused on vision and
seeing in and it's how we orient
ourselves and you know so that's another
question about habituation you know how
can we what can we do to start shifting
that um you know is that something that
could be in the territory of art somehow
you know it's it's I mean even even got
trying to go there and figure out how do
you how to represent touch you know that
it's so hokey I mean it's it's so hard
to get beyond the kitschy aspect so you
know
what kinds of experiments first come to
mind and I think I think a lot of people
don't ever go there you know because so
I'm not saying you couldn't but you know
it's so no no it's party to taboo kind
of really you know to focus on these
things I think in some ways at the taboo
and every philosopher of art in this
room knows just how deep this runs in
our field and it it was certainly there
before caught but caught really
instantiated site is the primary
aesthetic sense and then hearing and the
others just go by the wayside in a big
way I mean not not just that they're
ignored but they're derogated they're
seen as you know less valuable senses in
here and not if not even some would say
it has been said over and over again not
even aesthetic which is why feminist
philosophers attempt to recuperate and
and from ordinary everyday aesthetics
the attempt to recuperate these
so-called lower senses as important
aesthetic census has been such such
important okay I want to allow questions
from audience who are not yet and the
chairs and other speakers will have
chance so I won't if you don't mind I
would like to no no no I liked it but
yeah hi I had a question for professor
Connor um you said that vision is male
oriented and I was wondering if you
could explore that a little bit uh um
well I mean I I feel like you know
theories of cinema and you know the male
gaze not that women don't see but sort
of theoretically women are have been
placed in this position and and I agree
that that we that that's our position is
that we're we're more concerned about
being looked at I mean I think that
we're put in this place and goes back to
body taste again that culture has you
know created the situation for women
where we're we're we're we're more kind
of self observing than we are or maybe
we're observing others in a competitive
way but you know I think traditionally
women are not encouraged to you know
look out with with the kind of curiosity
and and you know desire to again you
were mentioning the edge of desire right
you need to have this desire to take in
what you're looking at two you know
experience knowledge whatever it is that
women have not been encouraged to do
that so you know I'm not saying that
that women don't see but I think women
are not talking you know they're not
taught to see or their it naughty Todd
isn't even the right word I mean they're
just not um they're not encouraged to
see in the same way nun or can I just
add to that um related to the thing that
I was just talking about what once he's
in philosophy for instance I mean what
has been kind of the theorized in
philosophy in the hierarchy of the
senses where um the the non-contact
senses sight and and hearing are are
considered the higher senses the more
important ones that into
actual senses and the senses that
involve contact and body smelling
tasting touching because they involve
contact with the body are associated
with you know the more bodily senses and
so put that against a background of
women traditionally being associated and
i would say associating ourselves with
the we do after all dress ourselves in
order to attract visual attention it's
not just something done to us right um I
put that against the background of women
being associated with body you get this
idea that vision and hearing are more
associated with masculinity I would say
no I would say not maleness masculinity
and they're also considered sort of
closer to what the animal senses you
know Claudia to yeah yeah closer to that
yeah to the net the natural world
so-called um you know so which is you
know with the female wet realm or
traditionally did that answer your
question
I wanted to follow up on Julia's
question about research and sort of the
role of research in making I guess in a
conscious way you ended by saying but
you weren't sure about where all this
was going and whether it really made
sense to raise consciousness about these
19th century monuments in in New York
City but I mean I actually think about
this a lot because I teach here and I'm
trying to figure out how my research is
connecting to young artists and
designers learning how to work and in
fact I think that what you're doing is
not raising consciousness about
monuments it's raising consciousness
about the erasers of history and and
sort of acknowledging that and
recognizing that is something that
speaks very directly to our students and
sort of reminds me of what's going on on
campus right now among the black and
minority students protesting the lack of
a recognition of their own experience so
there I feel like there are many ways to
to take that I'm also really interested
in your your focus on the speculum and
since I've been to RZA since I've taught
it rizzi I've been trying to interest
the industrial design students
especially the young women and
redesigning the mammogram machines which
are another instrument of torture out
early and I I can't quite figure out
whether or not interested except for the
fact that I think they're too young to
have experienced them so that's one we
do a field trip Yeah Yeah right right
right but also thinking about
how these issues connect to our young
students I'm thinking about the the role
of advertising and the way in which fine
artists can get themselves it's sort of
inserted into public culture in ways
that have been done in the past and are
very powerful in fact very powerful
public forms of art because it's not
where you expect it you don't expect in
like in the advertising in the subways
to be confronted with sort of rethinking
what that advertising is about and it's
sort of the unexpectedness I think that
makes it particularly powerful
the ability to take
and in art history I mean was might with
my training but I'm sorry I just wanted
to I think are you advocating that maybe
we try to take ads in the subway ya know
why because I think that's great i mean
up artists have done that like he did
subway us and there's a what's the
collect rent puri right yeah you're
right i mean i think it's it has a lot
of potential and you need to find an
enterprising please d student right now
who helped you on this project and i'm
curious to know are there um have people
at RISD worked on things like um sex
toys for instance that is that something
one might do here is that I I don't know
of any example but there in the past i
do remember long time ago there was a
industrial design project on how to
improve the weight ball when you get the
pelvic exam the you know the stirrer
yeah yeah so that's another component
yeah it seems like this is really this
is the place to take these off in a way
I was supposed to somebody about sex
toys yeah I not but I mean it seems like
so once you start working on sex toys
you're thinking very much about touch
and about that aesthetic pleasure
particular and this this should leave
right into thinking about speculums
yeah yeah I mean can you imagine
designing a speculum that might actually
be pleasurable like it almost seems
taboo to think about right then that
part that might actually be a
pleasurable experience not just neutral
but might be one that actually allowed
for some enjoyment I think I think you
know that doctors they wanted to steer
clear of that you know you know except
for the fact that the first yeah
vibrators were medical right they were
meant to cure hysteria and doctors who
used them for women to masturbate in the
end of the 19th century because they
thought that women who were hysterical
couldn't couldn't have sex or couldn't
comfortably have sex and they needed the
release so they doctors would use the
vibrators on the women I'm sure you've
seen the movie anyway there's
no I was just going to say that I do
think actually it's sort of the
aesthetics of pleasure that is actually
the taboo so I think touch comes into it
was this notion that the you know
speculum experience could be pleasurable
I think that's about keeping distance
from the body and I mean I remember once
having the the internal examination and
I said to the doctor that was the most
pleasurable internal examination I've
ever had because they actually warms the
speculum first yeah and so for the first
time it wasn't just the sort of you know
sort of retracting into shock and
discomfort but it seemed a very odd
thing to say that that was the most
pleasurable internal experience I've had
because then it moves into the sort of i
think air of sexuality and that actually
if we engage with pleasure it becomes
sexual rather than kind of a celebration
of the pleasure of the aesthetic body
experience and just to round off i am
doing a class in the summer and
intensive it will be sort of how how do
we desert and tap into desire within the
body so i'm sure there will be some sex
toys that may become covered a large in
hand right that's here yeah in the
summer if you want to sign up I think
that's right i mean in aesthetics um one
of the things that people have long said
in trying to distinguish aesthetic
pleasure from other kinds of pleasure is
you know sex is the sex and food are the
things that are
as you know definitely what aesthetic
pleasure is not so and you know the word
is that it might be like that no no it's
a different kind of pleasure and there's
a whole really long history and it's
still happening actually had i'm
commenting on alvin always a recent book
on aesthetics and art in a couple of
weeks and so i've been reading that and
there are still people saying aesthetic
pleasure is disinterested and distanced
in some way I mean this is still even
though you sort of think that that has
because there's been a big backlash
against at in the philosophy of art by
some people in this room nevertheless
that that that view / sis and and sexual
pleasure is one of that one of the most
popular foils really really interesting
talks thank you so much I have a
question that kind of relates to both
but I think it's more for and in the
sense that I'm a little concerned about
the historical contingency of taste but
I know you're obviously aware of but
throughout your talk there was a well
maybe I could start with the idea of the
affective component of human action
versus intellectual beliefs and I think
I certainly in my experience find that
having lived in different countries for
example having been in very different
life situations that my intellectual
beliefs change and often affect my taste
so I don't think you know there's kind
of one in the other and I don't think
they're disconnected and I don't think
there isn't a kind of historiography to
the way they work even with individuals
but then of course culturally as well
the idea of the you know thin white
female body etc is historically
contingent and did not used to be the
case so and then I wanted to just bring
that over to towards the ends where you
know everyone in this room probably
agrees with the basic idea of having a
more tolerant open-minded sense of
embodiment or embodiments that are
desirable but there's a bit of a concern
when we argue that you know somehow we
or people need to know the right sorts
of things which we can then present
through whether it's to advertising or
visual art or would have you because of
course who gets to decide I mean that's
the most dangerous question historically
because we might think today that that's
the right thing we might find you know
50 years from now without doubt people
who are just being born we'll look back
and say what would they think and there
will be a totally different political
framework so yeah so I think like we all
agree here and it all seems right but I
think we have to be much more
self-conscious about the historical
contingency of what we believe to be
either politically efficacious or f you
know the right kind of taste or the kind
of taste that we want to call for mm-hmm
thank you for those comments I um I
really appreciate this question um I'm
going to start backward uh yeah agree
about the historical contingency point
and I didn't mean to be describing our
situation now so when I when I'm talking
about the idealization of the thin
racialized as white young cisgendered
etc body I meant to be describing our
situate
Chanel and and I do think that it's
privileged and does a lot of damage and
it's been different at different times
and his different in different places I
was really I really meant to be talking
to us yes I mean because the circles I
travel in the cisco is really not cool
so like I actually have to struggle with
yeah you know not being identified as as
queer necessarily even though that's the
work that I do so I mean though that
isn't it okay so when I say it's
described as now and that could be i
should say i meant to be describing the
dominant situation which is the one that
ultimately trans people and queer people
and fat people and old people and
disabled people have to struggle against
and it is why we have fields
characterizing those so i mean i meant
to be describing the dominant situation
which is responsible for the modes of
oppression that these people so that's
so I'm totally with you there and I
think you know it is precisely that the
dominant taste shifts and is different
and different but you know both
diachronic Lee and synchronically that
is what gives me hope that the dominant
taste can change but the fact that it's
different different places different
times and that it's malleable is what I
think is is is the hope that I'm trying
to address in the habituation part of it
and the last thing I want to say is I
totally agree about the historical the
historian but I also don't want to be a
relativist about it and I think we can
only do the best we can do and so there
are things that are not on my radar
screen yet you know I have my list of
the impressions that I um that I know
about our think about and I'm always
learning about you ins and um that is
just the best I can do but I'm not
willing to say that you know being trans
positive is just a historically
contingent ethical position I think it's
the right one I'm not willing to say
it's just my position
I think it's the right position to have
I know this is this is a this is a point
of contention between philosophers and
and and people in other fields I think
office well I think it's analytic versus
continental philosophy is the best oh so
here's here's the question I mean would
you not say that it is wrong to be
trans- I think we should have a nice to
go to lunch program yeah I'm getting the
that gesture so um alright yeah and I
just I just really in closing I just
really want to thank you both and in
marine for fantastic presentations and I
read something this morning saying that
for a long time for feminist art
aesthetics has been on the back burner
but i want to thank you for turning up
the pilot light and creating some heat
and friction thank you very much
