coming it's great to see so many
students here thanks for coming guys so
and thank you so much to to the previous
session participants you might have
started something I just had a
conversation with a colleague about
doing a collaborative class and sex toys
and speculum design from a sculptural
industrial design and digital + media
perspective so who an earth knows who we
can get to sponsor that class so we are
here to talk about the aesthetics of
performance and I just want to start by
throwing out something that Richard set
schachner one of the founders of the
first performance studies departments
which was at NYU's Tisch School of the
Arts still going and founded in nineteen
eighty and what he said about
performance studies is in direction is
characteristic of performance studies
this area filled discipline often plays
at what it is not tricking those who
want to fix it alarming some amusing
others and astounding a few as it slide
whines its way across the deserts of
academia so with that I am delighted to
introduce our three speakers who may or
may not in direct us alarmists astound
us and amuse us but I'm sure that we
will be very interested in everything
they have to say so Derek Adams who is a
multi-disciplinary new york-based artist
and curator Eleanor I just asked you how
to say your name and now I've completely
forgotten fa w Fuchs Thank You Ellen of
Fuchs who is professor emeritus of
dramaturgy and dramatic criticism at the
Yale School of Drama and Amelia Jones
who is the Robert a day professor in art
and design and the vice dean of cultural
studies critical studies excuse me at
the Ross School of Art and Design at the
University of Southern California so
Derek we're going to start with you
first I want to thank the organizers for
inviting me to participate in the
symposium I'm really excited and nervous
because as an artist and I don't
necessarily consider myself a
performance artist but I do love to
entertain ideas of performance and
concepts are surrounding performance
within my practice and and for that I'm
excited to talk about the aesthetics of
performance and how it relates to my
interests as an artist I want to start
with this piece breaking news this
evening we adjusted for my radical
forces that we are all operating on a
class is lovely pretty which is well so
i say all of your travels and report any
suspicious for something
this just in we are receiving reports
that many are slowly changing previously
low consciousness level color code GREEN
to the more proactive consciousness
colorful level blue which is guard a
positive trend in the right direction
but there is much more work to be here
so as you're becoming more aware of your
surroundings I remind you if you feel
something say something I am Jemaine
ready ready reporting live from the chat
we now resume rm7 guard leave you a are
Dez god I treat my god but some no one
knows my secret the news tonight
conscious levels continue to rise with a
creamy subtle book to our current level
yellow or elevate its continuing trend
whatever it touches is a positive side
of play and all of these images for
affected by our actions I'm sure every
reporting live in the channel and
remember if you take something today
we interrupt this program is a special
bulletin the consciousness level has
been raised yet again in light of
general positivity the channel is
determined that we are at a higher
consciousness level orange tell afraid
and I remind you if you want something
makes I'm tomato and bring reporting
live from each other good evening I come
to you tonight with all the most
important announcement of my news career
I'm first confirm that the channel is
just raise the consciousness of the
colorful bread severe those severus I
normally associate with the positive
finding the experiment slope garden
elevated and higher with limited results
at this time the channel gives a severe
is our only hope it is not without
danger that we entered the station
consciousness as counter forces are
completely comfortable in severity and
as such the channel believe the highest
level of consciousness if you wanted
again I remind you if you have something
so thank you that was an excerpt from a
performance at bam fish fishermen
building in in 2012 part of next wave
the pizzas called the channel cultural
levitation
so bad with me I'm trying to get the
slide show going
okay cool I got it right first I just
want to start to talk about categories
pertaining to the aesthetic of
performance until maybe about two years
ago I became very interested in
dissecting the statics of performance
and the principles relating to my
artistic practice but not really as an
artist but more as a cultural producer I
didn't want to entertain the notion that
my experience and relationship with
academia would solely responsible for my
decision making because Columbia
University I related aesthetics with
beauty ugliness form and function of
more of an institutional critique which
was problematic mainly because most
things I find aesthetically pleasing and
valuable are usually things that have
not been quite or yet discovered or
uncovered which to me makes them that
moment much more interesting and
precious as a black man who is educated
in an institutional structure and also
with the history of being a black man in
America you understand that one of the
main positions of even being brought
here historically was to entertain was
to perform and perform in various ways
not just dancing and singing but working
and dying and crying everything that was
created at that time was done in a
public space so being vulnerable as a
person of color kind of goes hand in
hand with performance and
living in this society what is really
interesting about the aesthetics of
performance for me personally is
understanding the value of physical
presence and what that what that really
means for me as an artist and being able
to negotiate what that exchange really
mean with myself and the audience and
what am i interested in revealing
through this exchange so I decided as an
artist after graduate school to start
already thinking about how to
incorporate my ideas in various ways
when I'm doing performance this recent
project that opened not too long ago at
the bemis in Omaha is called cross road
when I was invited to do the project as
an installation I always think about the
audience in the community surrounding
the space and when I was invited to
participate in this exhibition or to
present an ID and exhibition I wanted to
really think about the history of Omaha
in a separation between the north side
and the other sides of Omaha so I
created a piece called cross road which
is a combination of a board game a
trivia board game and the music
component that triggers the game what I
was interested in performance in this
particular case is how I thought
everyone performs I think you are always
in a state of performance in some ways
we present ourselves in many ways and we
participate sometimes willingly and
unwillingly subconsciously or without
knowledge this particular game the
crossroads really invited the gallery go
to participate in the performance
there are also elements of performance
that I'm interested in where
participants can also witness they don't
have to participate but witnessing is
part of participating and I always
consider that when I'm organizing an
exhibition of my work the idea that
anyone in the space is part of the
performance even the audience in the
audience can be put to work in some ways
if not put the work they can be included
in the documentation as a archive of the
happening and installation and for this
particular installation everything was
designed to look like a gigantic board
game there was also an element of
surveillance part of the installation
where people could also witness
themselves in the space so with all
these different levels of awareness and
function and entertainment and intellect
happening with the trivia the trivia
game is is a based on American knowledge
and usually with my performances I try
to insert or camouflage what I want the
viewer to know versus what the viewer is
willing to accept and gaming is one of
those things where you can really
camouflage things that almost like a
child you can educate someone in a way
that makes them make them feel like they
came across the knowledge on their own
not forced upon them and i like that i
like the idea that most things that you
obtain are based on things you want to
absorb vs what you want to reject there
was also instructions on how to play the
game on the wall and that's one element
of the aesthetics of performance that
really acknowledges the audience and
really challenges the audience in a way
that is very familiar but unfamiliar
most people know about games and they
know about trivia they also aware of
certain aspects of music and that was a
kind of a interesting way to entice
people to be a part of this piece this
is this is another performance as I did
for performance 15 it was a radio
station structure similar to the other
piece i just showed also had a radio
station component where i can project
what's happening in the space into the
world so it becomes another part of
performance where you can narrate the
way that things are happening for a
person who is not there to imagine the
performative action is happening in the
space so it's like poem is like an audio
audio performance this particular
performance was reenactment of a circus
I was invited to participate in perform
of 15 and the concept was surrounding
the Renaissance so in this particular
performance what I like to do a lot of
times in my performance work is really
consider the space the space is very
significant in in the planning of all of
my performer that works who the audience
is what do they know whether they don't
know that access to the space visually
how open the space is to the community
because one very important thing to
think about when I think about how to
present an idea how to package a
performance and how to present it and be
effective in the presentation of your ID
ID performance is all those things even
the way the door opens in the space
where the door is located if it's a
ground space is a street space all those
things are very important to be as
effective as you can be if you're trying
to communicate an idea with performance
and as a visual artist
I'm really aware of those things not
just what I'm doing but what everyone
else in the space is doing and when I'm
asked to perform in a space I consider
the history of the space the function
and the mission of the space and I work
with that as part of my performance in
the space previous image of Bemis I was
thinking about the openness of the
community and learning the community in
this gaming allowed me to meet people
and be stationed in the gallery at a
certain point and people came to the
gallery and I met them and being a
stranger to Omaha that was a part of my
performance in my engagement with them
through this performative action this
particular piece I invited a series of
other performance to participate with me
in this circus structure and what I try
to do with this particular performance
is create parallels of the Black
Entertainment within the circus
structure I try to make a comparison
between the idea of the the phrase
twerking with the contortionist body and
how the contortionist body which is part
of a way of operating the body in the
being suggestive that's not necessarily
a thing of spectacle but a thing of
transformation I invited other
performers who saying comedians things
that related directly to the structure
of the circus but now that's not
necessarily leaning leaning strong on
the rigidness of the of that concept of
the circus really breaking out of that
structure a lot of performances that I
create use aesthetics that are already
in place based on certain aspects of
culture and culture and entertainment
within the culture with that familiarity
I'm able to really break down certain
archetypes and stereotypes are created
within these pre-existing structures and
to make the view more aware of the
construct of identity raised sex
entertainment hoop who's the players
what are their roles all these things
that I think are very significant in to
understand understanding popular culture
and how popular culture it works with us
as a reflection of society in how we
play a part in the construction of these
ideas with in popular culture this is a
performance from algebra in Newark I
know if anyone knows about this space
but I was invited usually I mean when
I'm invited to do a project is usually
when a performance cap happens for me I
usually don't propose exhibitions or
proposed performances unless the space
is interested in in doing something very
experimental that is not necessarily an
art object but in some way connecting
people with the space outside of the
space this particular piece is called
the holdout and its installation piece
with a radio station built in this is
the first installation i did with a
radio station and part of the structure
was to create this installation and
inside of the structure was an operating
radio station which with different guest
hosts so the guest host I invited were
mostly artists but also people from the
community it was open to the public and
people just came in sat in the tent with
me while I played and if they were
interested in hosting I gave them a day
to host it was very open it wasn't a lot
of structure with what to talk about or
how to talk about anything but it was
really more about using my position as
an artist to help the community to have
a voice because like i was saying
everyone is performing everyone's a
performer just some people don't have
really have a platform or know what
their performance is it really really
consists of until they actually have an
opportunity to
to speak to engage to contribute this
actual performance every time I do a
performance it shows me a lot about just
myself as an artist how do I work with
people how do i execute my ideas how
effective they are to you to the
audience this is a performance from the
kitchen 2012 it's called go stay next to
the mountain when I was invited to do a
performance at the kitchen this is
another type of performance it's a it's
an audience it's a stage it's a
performance space this was actually the
first performance space that was invited
to do a piece so I'd really consider the
performance space as part of the
performance normally in performances
I've always been more excited about the
engagement of the audience on a very
accessible level where my pieces have
always been in the on the ground in the
gallery or in the space where people can
just walk up into the sculpture or into
my performance and become part of the
performance but when I was invited to do
the piece at the kitchen had to really
think about how the structure of
performance in relationship to a
performance space without really leaning
towards the traditional structure of
performance which is the audience's up
here in the and I'm right here I wanted
to create a performance where I was very
accessible if not physically
psychologically to the audience where
they feel they can actually connect with
me on a really personal level so this
particular performance is called go stay
next to the mountain like I was saying
before it's more of a musical related
performance with video some some some
speaking components but it was a very
lyrical performance with our original
score that was created in collaboration
with Philippe Troy who is a classical
composer this is an image from the
performance these are videos
which I usually include the thing is
about performance for me which i think
is very interesting for in the direction
of performance now and being aware of
social media as an artist of this
generation we're over stimulated we see
we're able to have a phone a laptop and
whatever and look at TV at the same time
without being necessarily distracted in
any way and I like that I like that
we're able to do a lot of different
things and be effective at at the mall
some people can and so when I make
performances I'm considering the way
people see now not the way people saw 10
years ago or 15 years ago so when I make
performances in certain spaces I believe
in the oversaturation of imagery so when
I'm doing a performance like this at the
kitchen I also included an overhead
projector that played simultaneously
with the live performance that was not
behind me but above me so all these
things with music video live action all
these things happening in the space for
45 minutes straight I never left the
stage the lights never went dim the
sculpture that I that I made right here
was on wheels so basically every angle
of the sculpture was a backdrop so when
the video stopped the sculpture was in
transition and the next performance
happened there was also a DJ turntable
on the top of the sculpture and at 11
part of the sculpture I crawled inside
and came up to the top and played music
this piece is called a mountain speaks
this is another performance piece at ps1
dome and this was a piece that was
inspired by music as well it's called
the Entertainer this was also an
audience artist audience situation more
than on a performative level this
particular performance right here is
called freedom with along
is a really exciting performance for me
because it was really about an intimate
setting in the gallery in the middle of
an audience I was invited to participate
in the gallery and create a performance
and I thought what would be great is to
have an intimate moment with a close
friend in the gallery while people
watched and what's more intimate than
having dinner I created these sculptures
they were Spears based on my utensils at
home and we set each other across across
from each other in the middle of the
space and usually i don't i don't
normally use a lot of professional
performers because it's a certain level
of consciousness or / / consciousness
that happens with people who are trained
as performers versus some people who are
just natural and nervous and scared the
audience can feel that and i think that
makes people feel more present so when I
make performances I try to really
consider even the people who participate
with me as a way of making it as real
and it's vulnerable and connected as
possible with the audience this
particular piece feeling with a long
spoon with a 30 minute performance and
it the components were 4 4 4 servings
appetizer appetizers main course dessert
and something else I don't know what it
was a forgot but in between those five
minutes of eating there were channel
surfing that was projected above us as a
moment of reflection before we went to
the next course and before with the
piece I did called the channel this was
also part of the structure of the video
playing the interlude plane in between
the live-action performance and these
are the images from some performers that
participated in that piece
and this is the order in which the
performance started and ended this is
also part of the performance we are
recreated a muppet based on previous
Muppet to exist to the 1976 called
Roosevelt Franklin he existed for one
year Sesame Street puppet and I wanted
to recreate them for this performance
because part of the structure of
performing and I'm really aware of the
structure of performance as an aesthetic
so if I'm going to perform in a theater
I'm going to make it theatrical i'm
going to use that structure to
communicate i'm going to use the the
lighting and the way people walk into
the theater the way the programs are
placed those things are really important
for the structure and the communication
of the performance in the audience those
things to me are not things that you
want to change not I want I don't want
to change them I want people to be aware
of the structure be aware of the drama
be aware of how you connect with the
subject matter through their
pre-existing structure of theater and
performance this is a private
performance this is a series all these
things i really do simultaneously all
these performances are things that I'm
doing at the same time it I may do a
public performance one week and then you
know next week I may do a private
performance I call where I just go into
a space in this duel like an action and
record it and become like a photographic
documentation or video project this
particular piece is called communicate
communicating with shadows and this is
the last of the images and this
particular performance was based on my
relationship to from influence as an
artist from other artists that I
respected and followed I want to have a
conversation about a visual conversation
about history a visual conversation
about relationships legacy conflict so
for this particular performance
I decided to go to the archive and find
all the artists that I that I follow and
all the artists that I studied and
create these silhouettes based on
documentation this particular image is
from Blizzard ball david hammons what I
did is went through archives of images
of different artists remove them from
their background and created a gigantic
silhouette with an overhead projector
and I use that image as a stage for my
performance why once I stepped into that
shadow I responded to one of their
previous performances creating a new
performance from that once I left the
shadow the performance was over this is
a another series of photos from that
series with Jim Henson since the first
time Jim Henson was on TV salmon friends
and he introduced URI one of the first
of its kind and that's a big influence
on my work I believe in performance
taking various various structures I
don't really subscribe to one particular
structure it's really really about the
messenger the messenger is part of the
performance the messenger is very
important in the way that their
performance and the message in the
performance is received so it can take a
form of a spoon or a puppet a music
score an intimate setting a big party a
radio station a board game it could be
anything but the success of all those
things is them as the conversation that
happens within those things and if the
audience communicates or at least get
something from it that's relatable to
your idea behind it that's the
successful performance and you and you
actually wrapped your idea and a grant
fantastic aesthetic this is an image
of joseph boys and is an image of wily
coyote and for some of you guys would
know is from the documentation of I like
American America likes me thank you
like my predecessors in this can you
hear me okay on the spot I just want to
say I to I'm so grateful to have been
included in this conference sometimes
the theater people are included in the
conference because the theater person
can be counted on to be the court jester
of any intellectual procedure patient
but I realized that is not the case of
this conference so thank you for that as
well I've learned so much here and will
continue to for the rest of the day this
paper is an account of sorts of what has
been a theoretical debate over
aesthetics in theater studies which is a
field not much given to debate since the
200-year quarrel between the ancients
and the moderns that were settled in the
18th century um and the paper also has a
title somewhat long title and this is
the title as my friend and colleague at
Harvard Martin puter has said I blame
Aristotle for everything or how
postmodern got pushed off stage by post
dramatic until Aristotle the Phantom and
the wings upstage them both okay part 1
post modern theater in the late 70s and
80s postmodern caught on as a label in
all the arts beginning with architecture
spreading to the Performing Arts first
dance then finally theater it was a
label best understood through the lens
of post-structuralist French theory
especially deconstruction the term
postmodern concerned not only the
dramatic text but theatres entire me
Samson and seemed to have considerable
explanatory power when held up to the
relatively new art of performance that
had begun to arise in the previous
decade in the work of major American
theatre artists such as the Becks and
Joseph shakin then
Meredith monk richard forman Lee brewer
Elizabeth Lecompton above all Robert
Wilson these artists worked with major
design elements and large groups of
performers so their work looked like
theater and we said that they produced
performance pieces whereas the work
produced on bare stages often by single
performers came to be called performance
art sometimes we said art performance
sometimes we said alternative or
experimental theater in the pinch we
could always fall back on a vont guard
post modernism was taken up by the
mainstream press and it wore out from
overuse like romanticism in the early
19th century used up I should know I
wrote a book about it it seemed to refer
to a philosophical world outside of
known theater aesthetics but in the
theater it was misunderstood the
construction was frequently equated with
destruction and was rarely understood as
it should have been as the disassembling
or the leveling of binaries and
hierarchies much less as indicating a
kind of nostalgia for earlier forms that
had been rejected by hyah martyrs and
all of this I know you folks know
meanwhile the rise and popularity of
this kind of theater was entirely
unaffected by definitional confusion the
abyss of postmodern staging might have
been reached with the birth of the poet
in the next wave festival at the
Brooklyn Academy of Music in 1985 in
which text by Kathy Acker setting by the
visual artist David cell music by David
Gordon were experimentally developed
entirely separated without any contact
with each other and then they were
simply put on stage by the theater
director richard forman without any
intended relationship
and this performance was well known for
one thing for being greeted with vocal
rage by those spectators who hung on to
the end part to post dramatic theatre in
1999 the book post dramatic theatre by
german theatre theorists han steel Amon
was published in Germany and laymen was
among other things in bricks theorists
and had his major teaching career in
Frankfurt but the period that preceded
this book in this period the procedures
book he was crucially a teacher at the
Institute for a pliable translating this
for applied theatre studies at giessen
and this institute was in part inspired
by the american performance studies paws
studies by the american performance
studies model pioneered in this country
by richard schechner at NYU and Dwight
conquer conquer good at Northwestern the
German true german experimental theatre
today owes its development to this
institute it seems to have been at
giessen at the geese in time that layman
was most impressed by the work of the
American director Robert Wilson and
Wilson was more produced and embraced in
Germany than in sown country and his own
state of Texas the still-living
surrealist louis aragon who I think saw
wilson's work in france wrote an open
letter to his dead friend Andre Breton
saying that in Wilson's work the theater
they had always imagined for surrealism
had finally been realized the term post
dramatic even more than its traits the
term more than its traits an atomized in
the book was immediately embraced by the
Central European theater community
then more widely embraced in Europe and
is now globally recognized the book has
appeared in about 20 different languages
including several Asian translations and
has taken over the academic discourse
even if it's not a term that's all that
well-known still by the general public
it appeared in a somewhat abridged
English translation in 2006 part 3 Peter
zondi layman was the last doctoral
student of the Hungarian literary
theorist Peters on d whose work was done
principally in Berlin best known in
English for his 1956 dissertation theory
of the modern drama which in turn finds
its roots in Luke kasia's theory of the
novel and before him in Hagel in it
Zondi proposes an archaeology of the
dramatic form which in his view didn't
become entirely dramatic until it found
its form entirely in interpersonal
dialogue sometime in the 17th century
let's say with Russy this part sounds
arcane but this is the most important
part this is alert most important in its
pre dramatic mode as on DS argument goes
from the Greeks to the middle ages
through the Elizabethans the theatrical
text still employed non dialogic
modalities such as the chorus and the
prologue and the epilogue and the
monologue and the aside and therefore it
wasn't entirely dramatic but in the 17th
century the dramatic text fully embraces
the adult dialogic form becoming what
Zondi called absolute drum and this
absolute drama represented a cultural
decision if you will
that everything important to human
discourse could be embraced through
dialogue nothing that was important to
our life on this earth there was nothing
that could not be expressed through
dialogue according to zombie and that
includes God in the devil this stage you
are you really no longer spoke to God
and the devil and God and devil did not
speak through the stage anymore vasanti
is entirely ignored in American academic
theatre culture we would be put out of
business if we taught our students that
the Greeks and Shakespeare didn't write
dramas um and that's too bad in a way I
mean zondi is very interesting and this
perspective I can't say that it's
discarded because I think the Americans
and maybe the Brits who are not I just
really not familiar with the word anyhow
to continue his argument for the better
part of three centuries the post
dramatic argument goes drama is
satisfied with what i'm calling this
dialogic compromise until it begins to
break down towards the end of the 19th
century this process Zondi called after
Brecht and after Lukesh episodes a shin
I'm not going to digress on what episode
means and probably you know anyhow
asanti tragically committed suicide in
1971 and it was his last doctoral
student who completed his project this
is where posttraumatic comes from tues
on DS pre drama Lehman now adds a post
drama and so we have a tripartite
structure we have free drama we have
drama three centuries almost
and then we have post drama but this
this drama of lemons is not only post
dialogic but it's in some sense post
textual it's more concerned with
performed theater than the written form
of drama and this is an important
addition in this theater the text
sometimes appearing only in fragments it
takes this place is only one constituent
of many among lights color music and
other previously hierarchic Aristotelian
elements to this process of theatrical
let's call it theatrical Dimmick
democratization lemon gives the greek
term parrot taxes a grammatical term
meaning to place things side by side
without subordination or coordination if
you remember my example of the birth of
the parrot this was also the prime trade
of postmodern theater but then you know
maybe both of them owe more to modernist
collage than they were willing to
recognize laymen most importantly
expanded Zhaan DS focus on the dramatic
text mmm to seeing stage and theatre as
one interactive organism and of course I
was so interested to hear Derek say the
same thing about his own performances
gone in the new theatre is what htl on
see Simon caused the fictive cosmos on
one side of the curtain and the passive
audience on the other side of the
curtain separated by bog nurse mystic
Gulf in a new theatre the post dramatic
theatre there is a live exchange in the
moment creating important word to laymen
situations of the quote real this is not
leçons real it's not if since realism or
Zola's naturalism but the real of
immediate and unpredictable interaction
between state
in house the notorious incident of the
coupling of naked bodies of actors and
spectators in the living theaters New
Haven performance of paradise now in
1968 and it's aftermath of Street
incidents and arrests is perhaps the
most real real of this genre but it
hangs on to this day in empty gestures
as I just saw it a couple of weeks ago
when lived Oh Dean of Russia's Molly
theater had his actors in Chekhov's
Cherry Orchard invade the audience by
entering and exiting the stage through
the aisles of the house and that kind of
gesture is today as about as real as a
three-dollar bill in less rare and I do
think that hunts tea slamming to would
reject it part for the end of drama like
a huge magnet the term post-traumatic
conceptually pulled together all the
post conventional theater forms of the
past half-century into a single broad
movement there was like this huge
recognition seen that went through
theater of all different kinds when
artists kind of looked at each other and
said ah this is what we've been doing
it's post-traumatic of course it doesn't
matter whether it's small thing in a
performance space or it's a a new
production of Hamlet it's all
post-traumatic this new poetics of
contemporary theatre practice was
immediately legible to the Western
theatre world because it could be
comprehended as taking place this is
second most important thing it could be
understood as taking its place in the
great lineage of dramatic Theory begun
with Aristotle's commentary on Athenian
tragedy nobody could say that about
postmodern nobody could say that about
derrida what did he have to do with this
whole
Christian lineage he did of course but
you know the theater people didn't know
we in theater we in theater are a field
that has never thrown off and seemingly
can never throw off the theatrical
aesthetics of Aristotle though we often
claim to do so or to have done so and
these aesthetics are as influential in
their defiance of as in their disregard
of as in their observance of what the
french academy famously called the rules
we learned from them that plot is at the
head of the tragic hierarchy followed by
character and concluded at the very end
of this six-part structure by the visual
by scene we learned from Hegel that the
order was wrong that was character first
then plot we learned from breck that a
focus on plot and character now one word
was the sentimental empathy of culinary
theater we learned from honcy sleiman
that even Briggs was culinary in the
sense of continuing to cultivate a
fictive cosmos so when his book came out
we wonder what was it finally it was
this it for drama was post-traumatic
really the end of the Aristotelian
tragedy of trajectory well there were
those who wanted to use post-modernism a
long time ago to drive a stake through
the heart of conventional theatrical
realism what made that perspective death
plausible at the time what's the idea
that theatre was changing and had to
change in tandem with what we took to be
broad cultural transformation in the
real world new realities would be
expressed in these new forms and new
forms would be grasped and embraced and
intuitively understood because cognition
itself was changing in this new world
but unlike postmodern with unlike
postmodern within the world which
thought it understood transformation
post dramatic understands change as a
dynamic within a genre not sure I said
that very clearly postmodern aspired to
see the stage reflect transformation
within the world and posttraumatic
describes it as a dynamic of change
within a genre of theatre here's the
last part Aristotle's revenge theatre
has often been behind the other arts in
embracing a new aesthetic perhaps
because it is such a collaborative art
form and it become it comes burdened
with too many consent forms you know
everybody has to agree stage managers
have to agree the sound designer has to
agree when we think about other attempts
to oppose or undermine foundational
principles in the arts we remember
pictorial abstraction as at one time
signaling the death of figurative art we
remember serialism as signaling the
death of mmm the death of tonality we
remember parole in the Burton's alma
signalling the end of the systemic
organization of language into narrative
and we have seen how those attempts
appeared to be the wave of the future of
those arts until they weren't and
finally we've seen that those radical
modernist departures were reabsorbed
into the process of adaptation of those
arts and have now become available
methods in arts that have brought back
the tonal and the figurative and
narrative so lemon could have been
documenting the end of an art form as we
know it or knew it
could have been observing a lady
eruption into the theater of the century
old performance techniques that emerged
with avant-garde modernism at the turn
of the 20th century except then the
future sent AZ or the data performances
we're not really considered theater art
at all and let me say when I went to
graduate school they were never taught
as part of theater they were really
taught as a kind of adjunct visual art
somehow they belong to museums hmm and I
can't resist adding that is one of the
great switcheroos of the American art
scene that performances back in the
museum's first is authoritative
restaging of what we'd seen 20 years
earlier in the theater as in the case of
Marina Abramovic but now museums are now
creating their new performance every
museum has to have I don't mean this in
all in relation to anything that you
said I want to save it hmm but but I
mean museums are in a it seems to be
museums are in a frantic competition to
be competitive by adding performance to
their visual menus avant-garde
experimentation in the theater really
decisively occurred when American
theater artists of the late 60s and 70s
early 80s picked up and continued this
is my view I'm like well not citing
anybody about in saying this picked up
and continued Europe's unfinished
avant-garde project in the theater
interrupted by the war but the leading
American artists of that epoch have
lapsed back towards more narrative
theater the Wooster group does Hamlin
and fedra Robert Wilson does Brickton
strandberg Lee Brewer does epson even
von hova does Arthur Miller the L
later repair service does the Great
Gatsby and of course they do them in a
highly imaginative deconstructive
interesting way but still these texts
perform there they have the armature of
these texts a fictive cosmos is a hard
thing to kill from an American
perspective now younger directors and
groups do not seem to be carrying the
insights of 50 years ago farther like
like Kansas City they've gone about as
far as they can go in fact conventional
plot and character plays are being
celebrated in New York this year and
regressive realist family drama
aesthetics are emerging as the newest
thing the methods described in the
handbook of post-traumatic aesthetics
that is the core of labels post dramatic
theatre book are now being reabsorbed
into the slow-moving adaptable forms of
bourgeois theatre so it seems to me and
even in Germany from which emanated so
much theatrical excitement say 20 years
ago even in Germany all that post
excitement the excitement of post is
somewhat post thank you
so I have to give a good disclaimer
first I am presuming to talk about a
trajectory in aesthetics with
philosophers and the audience I'm an
amateur philosopher so the way that I'm
talking about it I just want to make
clear I know it is filtered through my
art historical training and it's really
meant to be as such so I'm talking about
very briefly at the beginning here i'll
be talking about Kant's you know mostly
through the lens of how it's been
received in art history so part one
modernism's antipathy to the contingent
art aesthetics and European modernity
beginning with Burke and his
philosophical inquiry into the origin of
our ideas of the sublime and the
beautiful around 1750 as you see he was
quite open to the idea of pleasure being
a response to art who is stranger to
that manner of expressions are common in
all times and in all countries of being
softened relaxed invaded dissolved
melted away by pleasure with the rise of
revolutionary politics and the refining
of enlightenment thought we have a shift
to a model of aesthetics based on
removing sensual pleasure and again
extremely schematic I'm just pulling out
a few points here so by 1790 partly in
order to legitimate aesthetic judgment
is equal to rational pursuits Immanuel
Kant was articulating an anti sensual
model of aesthetics that 20th century
theorists of course would extend and
simplify and modernist formalism can't
established the basis for aesthetic
judgment which still functions in art
history and criticism and I'm ready to
argue that point late
are based on the key idea that the
interpreter critic is disinterested even
though of course we don't use that word
anymore the idea that the critic is
unbiased and simply discerning the true
meaning and value of the work as many
have pointed out including myself this
model is carried into modernist and
contemporary criticism gives authority
to the critic by disavowing his or her
interests what Kant was doing of course
in part with debunking previous
philosophers who claimed us that a
judgment to be purely subjective and
sensual the critique of judgment section
on aesthetics is an attempt to
legitimate judgment of art by placing it
as high as reason Conte was very radical
at the time and doing this he raised up
as that a judgment within the values of
the time Conte so according to count
while judgments of the good and
agreeable bond the subject to the real
existence of the object aesthetic
judgments or judgments of taste are
simply contemplative and indifferent as
to the existence of objects of course
many theorists have related this idea
and other ideas at the time to the
formation of the kind of modernist
meta-narrative but also the figure of
the coherent European subject which are
connected to assertions of universality
linked to the legacy of colonialism and
imperialism at work in European culture
at that time so aesthetics became a way
of substantiating the authority of a
particular kind of subject theorists
such as Luke fairy hans-georg gadamer
and William petes have argued that
aesthetics is part of the Constitution
of the modern subject again linked to
colonialism imperialism and capitalism
which were beginning to burgeon and
crystallized these formations taken
reductively
arguments did not themselves construct
but supported a conception of the
subject implicitly male white
middle-class and franchised as capable
of objective judgment detached
incoherent within himself untouched by
sensual desires or any interest in the
aesthetic object or elements of its
representation Conte makes very
interesting arguments about universality
stating for example the subject feels
himself completely free and respect of
the liking which he Accords to the
object hence he must regard it as
resting on what he may also presuppose
in every other person and therefore he
must believe that he has reasoned for
demanding a similar delight from
everyone accordingly he will speak of
the beautiful as if Beauty were a
quality of the object and the judgment
logical so it's that as if that the
modernist formalists chose to disregard
so here he states the judgment of taste
itself does not postulate the agreement
of everyone it only imputes this
agreement to everyone and not on the
basis of concepts but from the
concurrence of others the universal
voice is only an idea the assertion is
not that everyone will fall in with our
judgment but rather that everyone ought
to agree with it so of course
universalism becomes embedded in
european-based cultures such that it's
become kind of embedded I think in all
of the ways we still think about art and
I'm these are very loaded images I'm not
going into them but there's obviously a
reason that's there however of course
the problem with universalism is
illustrated by Hagel's point in his
lectures on aesthetics defectiveness of
form arises from defectiveness of
content for example the Chinese Indiana
Egyptians in their artistic Shay
their forms of deities and their idols
never got beyond a formless phase one of
a vicious and false definite
definiteness of form and were unable to
attain genuine beauty that's the
universalism of European judgment this
aspect of of aesthetics has of course
been deeply challenged by postmodern
culture postmodern art and
post-structuralist theory all of which
are part and parcel of the activism of
the rights movements and that's a really
important point for me so if we look at
gadamer he argues that that's under
post-modernism has or the post-colonial
situation the subject becomes
destabilized it was kind of both things
going on in kodama there's a little bit
of a maintenance of a what I would call
a modernist idea in unity but at the
same time he's very clear that art is
not a timeless present that presents
itself to appear us that it
consciousness but the act of a mind and
spirit that is collected and gathered
itself historically our experience of
the aesthetic is a mode of
self-understanding which has to do with
someone other than the self and we'll
see a lot of artists kind of enacting
this idea not because they've read
Gotama but because they're thinking in
the same way and they are enacting works
that are performative and relational
from the 1950s onward so then we get to
post structuralism in economy Mises
published in 1981 and truth in painting
published in french in 1978 and in
english in 1987 Jacques Derrida teases
out the contradictions in kant's model
noting that Conte wants the work of art
to be completely self-contained such
that the paragon or frame marks off the
exterior from the interior clear
li NE khana mimesis dari denotes that
kant's model is covertly tied to
capitalist logic in that free art is
opposed to paid or mercenary art he
argues derrida that art is to raise man
up and to avoid contamination from below
in these theories of aesthetics the idea
of art he argues relies on framing and
signature while extensively excluding
those from the supposedly inherent value
the idea of art secures its value
through a disembodied recourse to a
transcendent God like Authority which
validates the genius origins of the work
in this model vision is given the
greatest nobility again this is still
dari da as the other senses pollute and
threatened the coherent subject of
European modernity he concludes the non
transcendental I zabal the non-ideal I
zabal the non aestheticizing is the
disgusting side of embodiment the
absolute excluded I probably see where
I'm moving towards here frames again
that became intrinsic to the work itself
in the Baroque period and caryatids as
illustrated in truth and painting and he
never comments directly on these but
they're clearly exemplifying the ways in
which there is no clean inside outside
division that the disgust that is
supposedly expelled always already
infiltrates the work of art so there's a
constituent failure to contain or frame
and secure universalism in aesthetic
judgment while the continos thetic seeks
according to derry da to purge the
messiness of embodiment including
intersubjectivity and the vicissitudes
of interested pneus or desire from art
and aesthetics derry da laborious ly
points out how failed this project of
exclusion is and
there's a very interesting article by DN
Radha what kind of continuing and
amplifying on Doritos points called
impure mimesis this is the final ground
for the essential disinterestedness of
aesthetic judgments in order to say that
an object is beautiful and to
demonstrate that the philosopher has
pure taste everything returns to the
meaning that the subject can give to the
representation excluding any factor that
would make the subject dependent on the
real existence existence of the object
it is this exclusion that younger are
the younger generation of artists
emerging in the 50s and 60s reject and
in fact as Terry Eagleton wrote of
course much later in the ideology of the
aesthetic aesthetics is born as a
discourse of the body correct we could
argue that everything can't wants to
argue about that exclusion of disgust is
argued precisely because we can't
exclude it he wouldn't need to say that
if we're already not part of how we have
to always approach visual objects or
whatever we want to apply a set of
judgment to i want to say then that
artists implicitly or intuitively
understood that to radicalize what what
was becoming stuck in modernist
formalism they needed to return the body
to the picture and of course they needed
to put time back into the aesthetic
relationship part 2 art critics and high
modernism performativity duration
allottee embodiment as threat I'm going
to go through this really quickly
because I'm assuming that most of you
probably know all the arguments against
Greenberg and freed so they're in a way
kind of self evident in a way that might
be problematic by now
I am kind of caricature in the
complexities just for the point of
polemic greenberg's model of modernism
was explicitly oculus centric as Carolyn
Jones has argued in isight alone
Greenberg stated quote where the old
masters created an illusion of space
into which one can imagine walking the
illusion created by a modernist is one
into which one can look can travel only
with the I etc so in greenberg's model
there is a continual attempt to remove
the body to compress temporality and
color field painting becomes the epitome
of this transcendent formalist modernist
conception of art and of course with
Michael freed he takes these concepts to
almost a degree I might call hysterical
in the famous art and object hood where
his really his like passionate revolt of
line whadja round minimalism is
extremely useful because it's so extreme
but I think he also brilliantly
describes exactly what minimalism was
doing to the modernist aesthetic of
course he just gets the value of it
wrong so to speak I mean at least as
historically the judgment has occurred
so he takes Robert Morris's writing and
he he parody parodies at almost in art
and object hood so he says minimalism is
or what he calls literalist art is not
full within itself minimal art is placed
within a new genre of theater again
Eleanor would have interesting things to
say about why that's so damning for a
modernist to say and this is a negation
of art it's corrupted or perverted by
theatre he repeats himself a lot with
increasingly hyperbolic language the
experience of literalist art is of an
object in a situation you know one that
virtually by definition includes the
beholder the success even the survival
of the Arts has come increasingly to
depend on their ability to defeat
theater art degenerates as it approaches
the condition of theater the concept of
quality and value and the concept of art
itself are meaningful or wholly
meaningful only within the individual
arts what lies between the arts is
theater I could go on but the point is
he connects theater which historically
has long in art discourse been connected
with femininity and homosexuality I have
a lot of sources on that if anyone's
interested so it's also a move that
could be seen as a reaction to the rise
of identity politics to the kinds of
deep questioning and even violent
activist questioning of the kinds of
standards and assumed norms that lie
behind this kind of critical model of
disinterestedness minimalism is degraded
because it opens up temporality duration
allottee demands an awareness of the
contingency of the body self of the
viewer and interpreter for freed
temporality and contingency must be
suspended and disavowed from the
aesthetic experience in contrast
minimalism introduces repetition
duration and awareness of embodiment and
the duration ality of experience and
he's quite explicit on that point now
Robert Morris of course says in his
well-known 1966 article written just
before this on minimalism the experience
of the work necessarily exists in time
so this was at fridas explicitly
responding to the claims made by Robert
Morris now it's always mystifying when
I'm teaching this to undergraduates that
like
for free this is the great work of art
whereas minimalism is this horrible evil
opening to theater and they're always
like I don't get it they look kind of
like the same thing and those moments
with people who don't who aren't already
inside of these debates are really great
because you realize you know they have a
good point there so the constructed
pneus of that value system is really so
evident I think especially
retrospectively so for freed good
sculpture defeats theatre etc etc so
where we are then is the theatrical or
performative as dangerously feminizing
or queer as threatening modernist
aesthetics and I have Jack Smith
hovering in the background there in the
post 1960 period in spite or perhaps
partly because of freed we see an
increasing interest in returning to a
much more subtle version of aesthetics
for grounding the content self-reflexive
awareness that interpretation is always
already contingent embodied durational
and that universality is an idea not in
actuality so there's a much larger
argument here as to how we might think
about the confluence of the concept of
theatricality or duration ality or
embodiment as somehow connected to
performativity and queerness and this is
part of my next book project
historiographical exploring the
development of the notions of queer and
the notions of the performative both of
which come to develop as we know them
today in the post-world war two period
but for today let me just say and I have
a few more pages here if modernism
stopped time than younger generations of
theorists and artists again intuitively
or explicitly understood that they
needed to act
they time they needed to expose the
relation ality between the work and the
body and this happens as early as the
early 50s with rauschenberg and others
working together at Black Mountain it's
no accident that by the early 60s you
have Susan Sontag writing on camp you
have Richard schechner saying some very
homophobic things actually about the
unfortunate incursion of homosexuality
into theater it's no accident that you
have artists more and more frequently
posing themselves in performing
themselves in either advertisements or
in their works during this period and
I've written of course a book about body
art as part of that development and so
there's a there's a interesting
intertwining of a concept of camp
homosexuality theatricality
performativity performance that really
starts to explode in the 1960s and of
course Andy Warhol is paradigmatic of
that moment with his many many comments
explicitly outing himself as a gay man
and talking about his swish demeanor in
relation to abstract expressionism the
Sun tech quad is just to remind us of
this it's a very complicated moment
there's a lot of different things going
on some of which have to do with a kind
of broader popular culture idea of camp
and others of which have to do with the
art world but the point I want to make
is that there's a link between the rise
of theatricality or performativity and
the rights and post-colonial movements a
desire to open art as experience to make
it clear that meaning and value are
reciprocal there's an explicit politics
to opening art and aesthetics to
theatricality performativity
the specificity of bodies making an
interpreting art of course there's a
coming together of dance theatre and
performance particularly in New York in
the 60s and again this is says schematic
it could be here for hours i love this
stuff but i'm just going to race through
it and then maybe in questions you know
people like Morris explicitly claiming
time as being an element even with the
sculptural objects carolee schneemann
explicitly claiming the importance of
embodiments as a way of activating that
race of prosody of meaning the crossover
of feminists dance practices and
minimalism the cross over of underground
performance queer aesthetics again
radical underground performance in film
so just in the end then I'm trying to be
very quick but I don't want to skip
these pieces at the end which are kind
of artists dealing with the legacy of
how to thwart the freezing capacity of
modernist criticism as it tends to
either erase bodies through claims of
transcendence and the course that would
be the kind of Barnett Newman abstract
expressionist model or to freeze bodies
in place allowing viewers to forget our
own embodiment at the cost of others
bodies themselves and the trajectory of
fetishism within Western art is a key
element here and so then it this is the
kind of work that I want to end with
someone like Renee Cox and interestingly
these aren't live performances these are
performative i would say kind of self
imaging which we know through
photographs she's taking that legacy of
the freezing of the living body of the
colonized other and she's instead of
allowing that to remain a kind of frozen
past image she is read einem izing it
through of course through appropriation
and parody I can never show enough for
Nighthawks Mercer cigarette she's I
never met her so you can introduce me
but these images I think are just so
fantastic in the directness through
which they're cutting into that freezing
tendency and then of course you can go
through the history of works most often
actually by people who were oppressed
and who were enacting themselves through
the empowerment of the rights movements
who are again performing the body is
relational vulnerable neural and opening
us to our own contingency by revivifying
those relationships this one I'm not so
sure about actually I was double
thinking putting this in and I thought
Derek's point about being vulnerable as
a person of color and how you're always
like whether you like it or not in this
culture kind of performing that and how
some artists decide to put that in the
foreground of what they're doing whether
it's Renee or James Luna who's literal
izing the tendency to position Native
American cultural expression as artifact
which goes back to that discussion
yesterday by putting his body in the
vitrine at the Museum of Man so to speak
in San Diego and you know visitors are
coming and they're taken aback to
realize this is an actual living Indian
and that Native Americans actually are
still around and living and it's a very
simple point but it enacts the way in
which performance can open up those
relational bonds and refuse those kinds
of freezing that occur in
modernist theory and I want that image
of the actual cervix from you mr in
because this is all I this is all they
have yeah that's a goodie but again you
know these all relate kind of directly
to the history of fetishism and that I
decided just to pull out that one strand
because that's one of the most powerful
ways in which bodies can be frozen and
objectified of course in Western art and
popular culture so all of these artists
are in one way or another d freezing you
know by making you look at the cervix
here now biz Damante is inviting all the
white men in the audience or anyone
channeling a white man to come and eat
her penis burrito while she makes a
comment about the problematic nature of
the Sanka centennial celebrations in
1992 this is a great piece and it again
really activates by making herself
vulnerable but also kind of turning the
tables and making the white men which is
decentralized making anyone going up
also vulnerable of course because you're
being looked at as you're doing this
ridiculous thing Ron aithe I'm doing a
lot of work on his work so he's here
making himself extremely vulnerable and
inviting audience members to do
caretaking Zachary Drucker this very
beautiful piece with Zachary speaking
and voice over from a taped kind of
monologue and then having people come
and pluck all of her hairs off in a kind
of enactment of her transition her
gender transition and I'll just end with
returning to 18th century aesthetics
through the work of Paul Donald who does
this
he covers himself in white and it's
actually white stage makeup to become
the kind of glowing preternatural
whiteness that we see in this rare
moment of European art where they
allowed males bodies to be the objects
of desire and basically enacting himself
in that place which becomes a place of
vulnerability through the performance so
I'll just stop there thank you wow we
have a lot to talk about so but I have
to just say before I just want to go
straight to straight to questions and
hopefully a dialogue with everyone here
I just want to say that I'm especially
delighted that you talked about Michael
freed because I think he would be so
happy that I am here representing the
sculpture Department talking about
performance and a lot of our sculpture
students are doing performance pieces so
you know I think I think we're over it
Michael okay so he was a prophet yeah I
mean I just don't want to give him that
much crowd okay basically robert morris
had already said everything he said it's
just that he took it and made it very
polemic so that it was picked up on
questions where are the mics can you
raise your hand if you have a question
and then a microphone will make its way
to you
I want I'm curious about Luhrmann's
books popularity because it seems to me
that what Luhrmann is doing is
fundamentally modernist and structural
does take that erases or minima liza's
the experience of the the viewer exactly
what is being called theatricality wife
read and what is so present in Derek's
work in the museum where it seems like
the experience is paramount to the work
and the interaction with the work it is
what is going on and it's also quite
different from Ellie's own work in in
the death of character 11 basically
erases interest in gender in the body
and goes back to an extremely
conservative a structural approach to
the elements of drama not going back
before post racialism it seems and and
without any taking into account of
phenomenological responses or there were
the activity the experiential nature of
the theatrical event and so my question
to Elias is why has this become so
popular in the Academy at this
particular moment and and to what can we
account of this kind of odd erasure of
the the work of the 1980s and 90s and
thinking about about the theatrical
experience whether positively or
negatively
yo yeah anyone else who wants to talk
about it well first of all I'm gonna out
you this is my dear friend John Amy from
brown and when my book the death of
character was published 96 I think a
brown was the and John they were the
first people to invite me to come up and
speak about it so Brown had a long has
expressed a long interest in this
subject well you know I thought that was
the subject of my talk and I may be
wrong but this lineage that he describes
on the one hand it can seem quite
radical well you know drama's over and
and also drama never existed in a time
when we thought it was established but
on the other hand that very three-part
structure is really returning us even in
its rejection to traditional theater
aesthetics whereas that earlier period
that you're talking about was trying to
escape it of course one can mordant
lycée you know that didn't escape either
but it was a time of great excitement to
make that effort to look at something
that seemed to be really i have to
stress seemed to be new on the planet so
you may have some other thoughts about
about this popularity I mean it's
extraordinary in a way that this
particularly in its English translation
which is simply post dramatic theatre
it's not well translated and great
chunks of this long book were just left
out oh not really acknowledged by
Rutledge the publisher that there were
emissions of that dimension and then
every once in a while the translator
would put some
and that wasn't annotated as being the
translators remark so the book is a
little confusing but it can I think you
know really because of fictive cosmos is
a hard thing to kill I think that I
think the book completes a certain
theoretical narrative that people have
been looking for ever since we got into
theaters expression of modernism so it's
in it's satisfying you know what I mean
in a way that postmodernism never was
that's as much as I can say about it you
may know more thank you for a wonderful
panel Amelia I have a question for you I
think it's wonderful how you fill in the
notion of the queer I think through
these notions of performativity and
specificity the specificity of
embodiment and contingency and three
theatricality especially in light of the
history in Korea theory where the notion
of queer emerged according to some
readings with Teresa della ritas in the
80s and I'm Butler picking up on it so
relatively late with respect to some of
the history you are tracing so that
raises for me a question about the
contingency of the notion of the queer
visa fee the art history you're tracing
and it also raises a question about that
contingency specifically given that the
notion of the queer at that moment
emerged really as a form of normative
and settlement of both the gay and the
lesbian the homo normative and of
heterosexual lyst forms of subjectivity
so there was this very emphatic
association of the queer with a form of
unsettled
and a form of critique a form of anti
normativity even something that
contemporary theorists are getting away
from but I just wonder where you stand
fizza fee that because I don't see you
particularly re essential izing queer
through this list of of notions but I'm
just wondering if you identify the
career than primarily here is a kind of
still unsettlement of the fruit type of
figuration modernist figuration of the
body or how you await how you would
precisely locate it that is that's
really a great question and i'm at the
point with this project where I'm kind
of caught between doing this
historiography where if what I'm talking
about kind of does emerge in the 50s so
a kind of opening up of the
performativity of the self often by
marginalized you know putative Lee
self-identified gay and lesbian people
not that it never occurs earlier because
I've also done a lot of work on the
teens and 20s and there's something
going on there but William Burroughs
book queer you know there's a kind of
subculture that's starting to name
itself in that period that connects very
much to the kinds of art-making that are
putting the body in motion you know
interrogating this fixtures of modernism
but then there's also the queer that I
grew you know that I came of age reading
that is a much more you know 1980s 19
nineties formulation which starts to do
something quite different and to pull it
completely away from the subcultures
which often there is a devolution back
into a kind of essential eyes and
concept of sexual object joys and you
know what they were actually doing in
their spare time and so on so I think
there has to be a tension between those
really and the person who's queer theory
I am probably the most indebted to both
in theorizing the performative and
theorized and queer as Eve said what and
she said something quite beautiful I
think it's in tendencies where you know
she says the queer is this kind of fluid
anything that that works against
elements of normativity but at the same
time we do we always have to remember
there are certain kinds of bodies that
are oppressed and we can never pull it
fully away from so again that kind of
sexual identification I think both have
to be there the same way in feminism
we've long grappled with the way we kind
of do and don't want be talking about
essential eyes female bodies inevitably
we do when we're talking about speculums
and saying we don't want men to design
them that's a great example of where
there is an essential aizen impulse but
we also don't because I mean some of us
don't I certainly don't dumb because I
don't think we know what a woman is
actually we certainly don't now with the
very powerful emergence of trans culture
and gender
so they have to be intentional okay it's
105 but we can go ten more minutes but
then we have to finish
hi thank you for talks and my question
is for kind of Derek and Amelia and i'll
begin by Amelia's talk about how
performativity and kind of deep
privilege izing vision integrates
temporality back into discussion and art
and how maybe performativity not just re
integrates temporality but may we
conceive of temporality and how time
works and so thinking about the way
queerness or maybe the black male body
maybe anticipatory rather than backwards
looking or even integrated in its own
moment and I'm thinking specifically in
Derek's work on the board game how the
body is anticipated even if you don't
see it in terms of its own integration
in the game itself so I was wondering if
you could maybe talk about how queer
bodies or black bodies even in their
absence may anticipate an embodiment or
a rican ception of temporality and time
if that um regarding that particular
game crossroad the idea behind trying to
create a performative structure and be a
part of it as a participant in the
beginning stages of the sculpture the
performance sculpture was really about
making myself more invisible but as a
black person in the arts when you use
your body in your work the politics is
already embedded in the physical
physical so the goal for that particular
sculpture was to allow other people to
operate the game when I wasn't there but
the dynamic that happened the dining
that happened when I was present in the
space created a certain reality of being
of anticipation and also from the
audience but also a
like an idea of one thing that happens a
lot with me when I'm making performance
work is this idea of cool or am i cool
enough as an audience when they walk
into a space where I'm doing something
that's like a resistance it is not
necessarily because a lack of desire to
participate but idea that I'm
representing something as a physical
person in a space that is attached to
something much more related to images of
popular culture and images of
representation of the black male body
which is much you know as a creative is
very much equal to a queer body because
as a black artists whose male in a
creative space you represent this idea
of openness and and also depending on
what how you present yourself you are
much more compatible to the female
depending on how you're presenting
yourself as a intellectual as an artist
type so there's a lot of assumptions
about different roles that represent me
as an artist which I think are
interesting but I think that when you
make a performance that really engages
the audience you really start to see how
structure how social structures exist
and how they can actually be learning
tools for performance to know how to
connect with people and that was one of
the reasons why I created the space that
sculpture for that space is because I've
never been to Omaha and I know my my
time there was short and the possibility
of going out to the community in a way I
wanted to go to the community where
people were saying like you shouldn't go
to this part of town or you shouldn't go
to that part of town was also something
that was happening
in conversations outside of the gallery
space so that piece was really designed
in a way of kind of connecting with the
community and as a piece as a work so it
was very big challenge it was I don't
know if it's successful you know now
that I'm gone other people operating the
game and I think it's going to change
the space well i'm going to use your
example because i think that on the
piece that you do with the Dave Hammonds
yeah is is about kind of taking up the
way we always get anticipated to be a
certain way so in the art world what
does it mean to be a block man yeah you
know doing performance and then for you
to create this kind of recursive loop
back to this super important performance
performative artist from an earlier
generation is a way both of you know
looking back to empower yourself through
that kind of relationship and also
opening up maybe a new possibility of a
different kind of anticipation or
futurity your people engaging you so as
someone who's teaches a lot of the Black
Arts Movement just seeing that is really
very moving I'm going to include it now
so that my students know you know it
because a lot of art students don't
really intuitively grasp the importance
of knowing the history of earlier
artworks and I think that's a part of
what performance can do is it can
actually recuperate and enact a
relationship to that can I just add one
quick thing here because it occurs to me
that this totally relates back to
yesterday's before categories object
categories that were presented of
witness specimen work and cultural
artifact and that the one of the
conversations in the audience was how
you know what we're talking about the
objects were not
about how that activates an experience
but it seems to me that what the body is
doing or what your work is doing in that
particular piece is you are doing that
you are you are creating that as that
sort of zone of encounter so it has all
of that other register of stuff that is
very sort of live and emotive some
people when I saw the presentation I'm
thinking I think I'd do that I think
that by you know just as an artist I'm
always really aware of the actual
engagement of myself as an artwork in a
space with other objects that are also
artworks and how people encounter that
and how they respond to those things and
I think it's empowering I don't think
that I don't think of in a negative way
I think it's really interesting just to
see how people respond to me as an
artist and how they respond when I'm not
in the space when I have installations
that are in place at a space it's very
different and it's something that I feel
is empowering for me as a as a creative
because i'm learning how to engage it's
almost like it's the experiment in some
sorts with the audience and learning
what they're willing to accept or how
even how they want to learn because
people can show you how they want to
learn how they want to absorb
information based on the way they
encounter you may count of your work and
there's something about the the way
you're willing to be vulnerable which I
was also trying to get at in those
examples are sure that that's for me
what opens up what I'm starting to
theorize is a kind of queer space in the
sense of that that allows for desire the
expression of desire or repulsion or
fear or anxiety and that's a super hard
thing to do but it's really really
productive ok before we close I want to
make an announcement the next session
will
beyond aesthetics and low here at I
think it's 230 and after that session at
four thirty there will be a public sort
of a salon discussion including all the
participants to sort of reflect upon
today most of our materials I mean
really a rich rich material and so
public is invited and for those of you
who from RISD it's a college building
old library space and if you are not
from risky because it's correct I are
really ID card access only so I suggest
if you want to participate then I
suggest you come back to this if to this
auditorium no later than 415 and then
the those of us with briefs the ID will
direct you ok and now it's lunch time
thank you
