okay thanks very much we're going to
start our next session now and just just
a little mention that we have got a
little program here and if you grab one
or if you have one you will notice that
we have the order of events here but
also for lunch when we break for lunch
we also have a list of restaurants and
we also should be getting some food
trucks coming and one of them gave us a
menu so just in case you want to do some
long-term design planning yeah there's
your opportunity okay welcome to section
2 of panel two of the day this is worker
centered design this is a term which a
colleague of mine Lindsay French coming
back from a Richard Locke talk suddenly
said I think he was talking about worker
centered design and so we googled it and
nobody had actually used the phrase and
I asked Richard Locke and he had never
heard of the phrase either but
nevertheless it was a it was a framing
which suddenly as we were beginning our
discussions about this event we start to
get very excited about this idea that
obviously designers are artists and
designers are at many levels workers and
as I mentioned in the first panel often
exploited workers nowadays part of the
precariat but to the same extent there's
this whole tradition of thinking about
workers as potentially designers which
goes back to the very roots of modern
design in William Morris who famously
wrote the pamphlet a factory as it could
or might have been and and there's a
series of social movements so series of
historical events which were hugely
informed by this very proposition and
it'd be interesting today to wonder
whether we can start to build on the
last discussion and to create
connections so today we have a wonderful
series of speakers we have got Trevor
shorts is a scholar artist organizer and
share of the of the fantastic conference
series that goes on a new school digital
labor and he's done some wonderful books
he's co-authored from mobile play play
play grounds to sweatshop city and many
many other activities we have got Jose
Jetson who is a sociologist from Brown
University and Jose has worked on many
many different fields of sociology
racial and ethnic relations Latino
immigration development but most
particularly most recently he's been
working on worker self-management in
Argentina like the great pleasure of
meeting Jose for coffee at cafe utopia
in the hotel born the worker
self-managed hotel in bronze Aras this
summer so that's fantastic we have got
Caroline bullet who is has taught at
RISD at different points in her past but
she is also an artist designer organizer
and she does many many fantastic
projects including a real estate
investment cooperative at New York she's
been instigated trade school calm and a
whole range of interesting new platforms
for gathering together artists as art
workers and finally we have Colleen max
when Colin mcswiggin is many many things
he is presently heading towards applied
math in brown but he also has been
swimming around MIT the Royal College he
writes for Jack being here in four core
77 and he has many multiple interests in
design music algorithms and other things
that very smart people are interested in
so I will leave it at that and take it
away tree
okay so in the next 13 14 minutes or so
I will not only talk about tardigrades
but I will start with study grades they
are a half a millimeter long and eight
legged animals right that are nearly
impossible to kill so they can survive
extreme environments withstand
temperatures from just above minus 459
degrees on the Fahrenheit scale and to
well above the boiling point of water
they can go without food or water for
more than 10 years they can withstand
six times the pressure as a d at the
deepest part of the ocean and eight
years ago the European Space Agency took
them to outer space expose them to the
double punch of solar radiation and
space vacuum and most of them survived
even that so tardigrades are
biologically incredibly successful human
beings on the other hand are
biologically not as well suited for the
pressures of capitalism as former new
school professor Eric Hobsbawm taught us
unlike tardigrades we falter so from
taskrabbit and crowd flower to hoover an
Amazon Mechanical Turk there has been a
backlash against unethical labor
practices in the so called collaborative
sharing economy because of an utter lack
of concern for the workers so we seen
with Amazon Mechanical Turk which left
generally in this area workers have no
social protections a mechanical turk
novice workers have an hourly wage from
two to three dollars an hour and that's
also
for crowd flower and many other systems
ecosystems within that sector so every
uber has an under every above has a
below and over the past few months you
all of you probably read about these
sort of unethical labor practices those
in the news all the time and the you
will and you will ask right how this is
even legally possible so many people
have asked me this when I tell them this
they say well they can't really make
like in dollar two or three dollars an
hour because that's obviously against
the law right and well so far there is a
sort of coalition of silence and just to
to think about this just for one moment
the how this is possible right in 2011
the Department of Labor had 1000
inspectors who were responsible for 130
million workers in seven million
enterprises right so what you see is
basically a strategic and the funding of
the Department of Labor so that and even
when people are caught with violations
in the underpaid workers for example the
worse that can happen to them is that
they have to pay it back so it's like a
bank robber where who has the worst
disincentive would be that they have to
give the loot back when they get caught
but so but the focus of this talk isn't
really on that so much so I want to
really highlight was is what could be
successful about 21st century work so to
get gates workers must go through the
bottleneck of cloud sourcing platforms
where thousands of invisible novice
workers are paid between two and three
dollars and our workplace surveillance
is rampant and wage theft as a feature
not a bug I do find these tendencies
troublesome but there isn't just one
possible future of work on the local
level the likes of uber don't have to be
the sole weakness so Silicon Valley
loves a good disruption so let's give
them one platform cooperativism right so
a platform cooperativism is about
experimentation with good digital work
and
new forms of solidarity it's about
innovative unions work associations and
cooperatives building their own labor
platforms and design interventions who
did not in greet but the needs of
workers platform cooperativism is about
Labor's Cardinal history a carbonyl
lesson which is that confrontation with
owners in confrontation with owners
individual solutions aren't working in
the future labor would come not solely
from venture capital fund in Silicon
Valley ringleaders but from worker
cooperatives and inventive Union so
let's stop dishing out rent to the
middleman like lyft handy or uber owners
and investors don't have to be the sole
benefactors of these platform based
labor brokerages so rather than leaving
the economy exclusively to the
productivity imperatives of owners like
Amazonas microsoft platform
cooperativism could set an example of
good digital labor they do however have
to act fast right so social movements
regulators and cooperatives move slowly
while tech entrepreneurs are rapidly
creating realities on the ground the
future is seated now that the network
effect is chiselling prospective global
monopolies like uber into stone and that
is why workers organizers designers and
developers have to get their act
together now so and I think Cameron
brought this up earlier this morning the
importance of principles and values and
I want to come back to this so workers
need to be clear about their principles
and values the principles of platform
cooperativism must include job security
good pay transparency a pleasant working
atmosphere that means acknowledgement
and appreciation co determined work a
protective legal platform work weekly
work time of 30 to 40 hours depending on
the live stage of the worker so for
example somebody was small children
might want to work less and somebody who
is childless my 21 more
cool determined work a protective legal
framework I said life stages protection
against arbitrary behavior by owners so
platform cooperativism rejects excessive
workplace surveillance along the lines
of 0 deaths worker Diaries and reviews
and uber and TaskRabbit in addition
workers need to have a right to log off
platform cooperatives need to leave time
for relaxation lifelong learning and
voluntary political work good digital
labour has clear boundaries so with such
lofty goals a of course very hard to
achieve but I think is incredibly
important to articulate them right so
because our inability to imagine a
different life would be Capitals
ultimate triumph demanding higher wages
is one thing right but structural change
the creation of alternative models of
social organization of work is more
fundamental so work at taken factories
from Argentina to Ecuador and really the
prime model for me here this isn't about
creating a branch of uber X with
gracious permission by travis kalanick
the CEO instead let's rip out the
algorithmic heart of the sharing economy
clone it and bring it back to life with
the cooperative ownership model or a
unionized labor pool platforms that
allow workers to exchange their labor
without the manipulation of a corporate
middleman possible so democratically
controlled businesses such as
worker-owned cooperative score targets
smaller local niche markets without
having to focus on scaling up a
freelancer owned cooperative like the
San francisco-based loca nomics could
even benefit from the regulatory
templates established by the
collaborative sharing economy let's also
make sure that the responsibility of
family-friendly work isn't solely
transferred to the worker booba
TaskRabbit and handy are creating
conditions that are not compatible with
the family
a almost other arrangements of domestic
life really and the coil unit of society
platform cooperativism is about family
conscious shaping of work and life on
the level of user experience design so
UX design alternative open-source
platforms would have to rival the habit
creating seductiveness of the
approaching uber taxi on the screen of
your phone cute penguins are just no
longer efficient sufficient every bar
has an order and then and the interface
of platform co-op apps could instruct
users about its own fair labor standards
and the feeling social protections in
the sharing economy in fact so you and
to show basically how these companies do
not protect their workers against the
great life risks like illness old age
and unemployment such platforms could
give a face to the cloud workers who are
for all practices practical practical
purposes anonymous isolated and tucked
away in between algorithms
technologically building co-op apps is
by no means award walk in the park in
the transportation sector for example we
are talking about at least four apps
that you would have to build right it
would need to be one AB for the
passenger one for the driver and then
that for Android and iPhone so on and
both of which you would have to
constantly keep updated and usable as
operating systems and phones are
changing Scott Rosenberg taught us that
many large software projects have failed
or run dramatically over budget so open
source developers could publish core
protocols and api's and then allow
various independent open-source projects
to build their own different back-end
and front-end components this would
accommodate the various service sectors
from crowdsourcing irregular migrants
and domestic cleaners to babysitters and
therefore you can see that funding
through a crowd funding or even blocked
chains would have to be ongoing it
couldn't
just a crowdsourced crowd funded project
with a set budget that runs out after a
year so even now there are already
various examples of platform
cooperativism the freelancers union for
example it could place itself at the
center of one such virtual hiring hall
wouldn't that be a good idea they also
emerging forms of worker solidarity with
forums like this reddit forum from a
mechanical turk and design interventions
like Turk opticon in Israel la Zeus is a
distributed peer-to-peer right rental
Network and fear mondo in Germany is
cooperatively owned version of ebay
project in this area also include Blue
Ridge labs which is an incubator for
apps for the bottom twenty percent and
we should also mention fair beige labs
which innovates for the domestic worker
movement the transunion car service in
New York and the California apps based
driver Association and linking this idea
of platform workers to unions in New
York City there currently is a coalition
of 24 worker-owned cooperatives and they
are almost exclusively operated by women
mayor de Blasio just gave a million
dollars to cooperatives in NYC in the
United Kingdom there are 200,000 people
working in 400 worker cooperatives then
there's of course obviously example that
is always brought up right in the Basque
region of Spain Mondragon which is a
corporation of a Federation of worker
cooperatives that has some 74,000
workers so it would come as no surprise
when I say that platform cooperativism
is faced with enormous challenges
ranging from self organization and
management of workers the technology the
UX design education long-term funding
scaling wage scales competition with
multinational corporate giants and
public awareness to make good digital a
buy a reality it's essential for like
minded people to organize
from kernels of self-organization and
fight for basic democratic rights for
cloud workers so the future isn't solely
determined by slideshows in Silicon
Valley boardrooms it is about a
democratic society that doesn't tolerate
exploitation and encourages cooperation
platform cooperativism can invigorate
genuine sharing it doesn't have to
reject the market it cannot serve as a
remedy for all corrosive effects of
capitalism for all these unethical
practices and even illegal practices
that I alluded to and it shouldn't be
mistaken for a Marxist fantasy sir it
can be a reminder that work can be
dignified rather than diminishing for
the human experience and platform
cooperative cooperatives and not a
panacea for all wrongs of capitalism but
they could help to weave some ethical
threats into the fabric of 21st of the
first twenty first century work thank
alright I think I'm the practitioner may
be on this panel maybe that's why I'm
here it's a great honor to be here and
I'm really excited that we have this
worker centered design panel maybe this
phone should be here all right so I've
shifted from working as an artist or
designer who makes interventions into
someone who sees the necessity of
working as an artist or designer and
organizer so I was heartened by some of
the earlier panel and I hope what I
present shows this pathway toward art
and design with activism and I thought
since yesterday I was speaking with a
bunch of people who call themselves
social entrepreneurs that I could frame
my orientation not as someone who wants
to save the world but as someone who
wants to save myself and therefore
ourselves so this is a quick
presentation on a search to find
dignified work for the hyper educated
poor so that we don't think of ourselves
as designers or service designers who go
out into communities which sometimes is
a veiled way of saying low-income
neighborhoods but instead we see
ourselves as the hyper educated poor and
therefore are necessarily in coalition
with other people who are working poor
so I'll speak quickly about a group that
I helped found it's a collective called
bfam
if a PhD dot-com looking at the
potential future of the professionalized
creative person and the lack of the
possibility for a public intellectual
who does not also accept student debt as
a necessary evil to understand ourselves
in this society I'll then go into our
strategies making media art and
education and show you some of our
findings from artists report back a kind
of intervention into administration and
policy because people are familiar with
reports and then I'll talk about the
Solidarity art economies that excite me
some that I've worked on and what I
think is coming next for me and many
people especially in New York City in
terms of property and markets so who are
we were a group of artists designers
technologists all who have day jobs so I
think it's important when we think about
worker centered design that we don't
imagine that designers are workers who
work in the field of design many
designers are workers who work in the
service industry and a lot of our work
at BF amf a PhD is possible because we
all have day jobs with expertise in
other fields and that's also what we
report on so for example Vicky virgin
who came to one of our first open
meetings also works for the census so
she's able to add her skills as a
demographic analyst and also as a
performance artist to our group and
we've started to realize that what we're
doing is aligned with the principles of
participatory action research Maria
Elena Torre at cuny in New York City
taught me this in a week-long seminar
and she helped me see that participatory
action research is a framework for
creating knowledge that's rooted in the
belief that those most impacted by
research should take the lead in framing
the questions the design the methods and
the analysis determining what products
and actions are most useful in effecting
the change we want to see so we assume
that
people have valuable knowledge about
their lives and experiences and we have
a commitment to think through the
consequences of our research and our
actions and our practices include the
creation of multiple research products
so i think when we imagine what sort of
critical design objects are necessary
and how are they legible in different
contexts we also make videos and reports
so it doesn't only circulate in a
critical design distribution network and
we actively seek out audiences who
respect and engage our findings so we
gathered to ask what is a work of art or
you could say critical design in the age
of a hundred and twenty thousand dollar
art degrees what does it mean the Cooper
Union for example went from charging
zero dollars a year for 154 years to
suddenly charging over 30 thousand
dollars to incoming students and to talk
through our thoughts we want to engage
with multiple constituencies so on the
one hand we make reports that
administrators and policymakers tend to
understand and engage with and on the
other hand we want to act as the
statistics that are often in the reports
as artists who are more familiar with
exhibitions and talks like these are for
arts graduates and we've been able to
add the issue of art student debt to the
national news debate recognizing that
student debt is an issue for all
students but because we are artists and
designers we will talk about artists and
try and organize artists and designers
we're happy that other artists
collectives have used our work including
the guerrilla girls and I'll go into
some of the things that they restated
here and we tend to use the aesthetic of
the data visualization and the animated
infographic because these are the kinds
of vernacular styles that people are
familiar with ingesting now to think
something is true and for me it's
important because when my dad says how
is it possible that you give all these
talks but you still can't may
living in your field I can say well dead
eighteen percent of arts graduates work
in sales and other occupations and
seventeen percent are educators what we
still can barely make rent so I'll go
into that more later we also look at
poverty rates and rent burdens in case
artists or arts graduates think that we
are suffering the most to show that no
it's not as bad as the national average
and we need to join coalition with other
groups in order to actually make change
so we do make exhibitions and
installations we often mimic the
corporate donor plaques using an
interventionist or conceptual art
aesthetic but I thought I would talk
most about the fact that seven of the
top 10 most expensive schools in the
United States after scholarships and aid
our art schools and just to be clear
RISD is on this list they're just
further down in case you're wondering
and if you haven't been reading all of
the news about this this is partially
because spending has tripled but the
most important part that many people are
now aware of is that we're adding
bureaucrats ten times faster than we're
adding tenured faculty so what this
means is for example in Canada for
professors applied to become a Dean
saying that could do four times the work
and still get paid more than they would
as faculty members they were not hired
but this is the issue that we're up
against administrative bloat and for
example in the school where I will be
teaching and a half taught in the past
as an adjunct in twenty ten students
were paying on average 40 grand a year
and i was paid one thousand eight
hundred and fifty dollars as an adjunct
to co teach a course so this means that
the new school was taking ninety-five
percent of the income they generated i
calculated based on course credits they
were making over sixty thousand dollars
for my course and i was paid one
thousand eight hundred and fifty dollars
so this means that each student could
pay me 277 dollars per class around a
hundred dollars an hour but there are
paying the new school that and instead
they're paying me fourteen dollars and
fifty cents each per class per hour so
those stories haven't made change in the
way that I'd hope so I decided to join
this group and make a report we looked
at the American Community Survey because
it's the largest aggregator of data that
does include information about what
we'll call working artists people who
make their primary income in the field
and these are the fields we included so
sorry we actually did not include
designers this was in reaction to a lot
of creative class arguments that we can
go into in the QA and we also looked at
arts graduates and the main thing that
we found that people absolutely did not
want to see that I think is pertinent to
this conversation is that although we
have two million arts graduates in our
country and again we were looking at
these degrees for undergraduates
although there are two million of us
only ten percent of us actually make our
primary earnings in the field and as I
was heading here I was thinking well
maybe everyone here as designers thinks
I will make my primary earnings in the
field the difference is that if you're
making truly critical design and design
that is within four movements the
revolution cannot be funded we do not
have the money to actually support all
of the social movements and land reform
for example in New York City to do this
work with pay and therefore you too will
be making your primary earnings
elsewhere in order to add your skills to
the movement without pay so we do have
1.2 million working artists people who
make their primary earnings in the field
and i'll go into what was surprising
about them what we found about the 1.2
million working artists people who make
their primary earnings in the field is
that forty percent of them have no
bachelor's degree at all so they did not
graduate from a four-year school now
this says a lot about what we do
as accredited institutions and adjunct
faculty members that are complicit in
indebted our students is we make this
almost negative correlation between an
education and making a living in the
field if you want to do truly critical
work and so at BF amf a PhD we're trying
to ask what is this divide between
making and earning and having an
accredited degree and how is it possible
that these two are not overlapping in
the way that we might imagine
particularly when we take on our
starting salary in debt every single
year that we go to school and on top of
that we look at the accessibility of
this kind of education so for example
our population is sixty-three percent
white non-hispanic but eighty-one
percent of art school graduates are
white non-hispanic a lot of this has to
do with cost and what types of things we
teach in school similarly when we look
at sex in our country it's split 50-50
but it we have art school graduates that
are sixty percent female when it comes
to working as an artist forty-six
percent female so how can we co-create
dignified work for ourselves the hyper
educated poor I want more than five jobs
I don't want to be a 1099 queen I want
livelihoods of resilience and care and
while I could talk about resistance and
occupation i will today talk about
prefiguring the world that i want to see
in my classes I like to talk about the
Solidarity economy because I don't think
we need to rebrand a title for a
movement that is happening
internationally I think many
intellectuals do this in order to
themselves get a tenure-track job and so
I say the Solidarity economy and I use
the aesthetic of the movement
internationally rather than putting it
into international style with Helvetica
typeface I accept the squiggly arrow and
try and think about across class
aesthetic and so as I begin to make work
and think through sourcing producing
transferring using and allocating
surplus and I think through projects
I've made like this barter network
called our goods where we trade our
skills without money or trade school
where we learn without paying for class
I am reminded that there is a solidarity
economy in New York City where it might
seem like the center of cutthroat
competition but actually there are many
people engaged in cooperatives credit
unions gardens and community land
Trust's so for example when I think
through my work I don't just say the
title the medium and the duration I talk
about the property labor transfer and
surplus so these videos we made our open
access files made by a producer
cooperative sold at sliding scale
pricing and redistributed as collective
surplus this is how it looks in terms of
the Solidarity economy and this
barricade that I made into a bed is an
open access kit it's simply plumbing
straps that you attach to a police
barricade it's a DIY project not for
profit it's either free or theft however
you want to think about it and the
excess is recycled goes back to the
street when we're done if you want again
this is how that would look and this
dress that I've bartered is private
property it's not a dress for everyone
someone then owns it and I learned to
sew as an apprentice I barter with the
person to exchange the dress for
photography or web design and hopefully
it's a mutual surplus situation because
for me barter is not haggling it's about
mutually determined value and lastly
with BF amf a PhD this is an open-access
file we labor on it collectively it
costs 120 thousand dollar degrees at 4.6
six percent but you should get a quote
because it changes and it will be
collectively redistributed so again as
we think about the world that we want to
see
I think it's important as designers or
artists to start from where we are and
to acknowledge that there are pedagogy
of payment that are in this room itself
and until we acknowledge our own
urgencies we won't be able to create a
world that has that kind of intensity
and accountability to the people around
us will continue to do short works that
I call a DD they have to do with
short-term singular authorship duration
that is month-long or based on
exhibitions and debt so we look for
celebrity because we think that by
climbing the ladder will finally be paid
but I have to remind you all that we
have a trillion dollars of student debt
and so if we don't organize together we
will have another bailout but this time
it's not a foreclosure crisis of homes
it's a foreclosure of our minds and our
capacity to have public intellectuals at
all so this is the work that's urgent to
me and I would urge us all in our
classrooms to think about how we can
bring that urgency into critical design
and really make a world that has
community land Trust's real estate
investment cooperatives credit unions
worker cooperatives and many of the
models that already exist in the
Solidarity economy thank you
well first of all thanks to Tom Ian and
Ian for organizing this an inviting me
there is a work of the sign here
breaking institutional boundaries and
designing a new space for thinking and
collaborating and I think I wasn't
mentioned that my work what I'm going to
talk about today is about my work in
Argentina with the recuperated
Enterprise I'm doing research on workers
self-management on this enterprises in
Argentina which are a group of
enterprises that have been taken over by
their workers they were either bankrupt
enterprises or in the process of getting
bankrupt and the workers decided that
they were not going to let the
enterprise's fall and they occupy them
and appropriated them and converted them
into worker owned that worker managed
cooperatives part of the Solidarity
economy that Caroline was talking about
and which is we don't know about it but
it's growing everywhere here in the
United States in a tree America in
Greece and it doesn't get much press but
wherever we go we see this construction
of cooperative solidarity Munich mutual
action as trailer was talking so this is
a an interesting experience it's not
taking over there in time the Argentine
economy it's like about 250 enterprises
and blowing about 10,000 people but it's
an interesting case to look at what
happens when workers take over the
workplace how they organize it how they
manage it and it's very interesting
because the workers that took over these
enterprises did not
that because they wanted to create a
solidarity economy they were not
cooperative is they were not necessary
of the left they did that because they
were they confronted the future of
exclusion they were about to be thrown
away from the labor market and they say
we we don't want to take that they were
defending their life world they were
defending their modes of leaving their
identity and their livelihood and in the
process of doing that in the process of
taking a very defensive action they
created something new and very
innovative because now it is a common
practice in Argentina to recuperate
enterprises the bankruptcy law has been
changed to facilitate that so it has
been institutionalized into the toolkit
of workers it's a cultural toolkit and
institutional talkie that workers can do
in the event of confronting
marginalization so that's what I think
make this case very interesting and in
my book i'm looking at how they organize
the workplace how they make decisions
how are you know how order is a
democratic order is received how they
learn to to manage and to and to work as
you know as much enterprise but today
because we are talking about the sign
what we are going what i want to talk
about this you know how workers
appropriate their work and their
workspace it's basically the old
question of alienation and you know the
relationship between workers and the
work process in my research in my book
and talking about three cases a paper
factory a foodstuff factory in the
hospital I did research on six places
for factories the hospital and the hotel
but for reasons of access and of
interest i decided to focus on these
free so I'm going to briefly talk about
how work
works in these three cases I have a 15
minute so I'm going to you know what I
can stay in 50 minutes and what I can't
say if you're interested we can talk in
the questions in the Q&A part so first
I'm going to take about talk about the
paper Factory it's an old factory that
you know the original oh it's a small
factory of 59 workers 59 cooperative
members mostly male workers it's an old
factory the the original owner died and
the children the children of the owner
were not interested in the factory and
during the 90s in Argentina the roaring
years of neoliberalism the they were
come and it was free to import paper so
you know argentina argentine production
of paper suffer so basically the factory
was left to die by by their owners and
at some point it was going back rubbed
and the owners occupied it and usually
the owners occupied demanding you know
severance payment and out wages but the
work is occupied the manic that and the
owners did not reply so at some point
they decided that they were going to
start making it work for them the
workers decided that they were going to
put it into production and when the
workers decided that the factory has
been stopped for quite a while the
factory has to all machines of paper
producing one machine from the late 40s
and one machine from the late 80s so one
machine was relatively newer but quite
all for today standards the other one is
ancient for today standards and they
have been stopped for a long while so
they have to really bring them back into
production and it wasn't easy the
had to really use all their technical
knowledge of having work with them to
bringing back into production and I'm
going to show you some of I mean this is
the factory I took these pictures for me
when I was doing the research and oops
I'm changing in my own computer sorry
okay I took these pictures for me when I
was doing the research I didn't think
I'd show them but you know I came to
Rishi I cannot show you just text so
this is the factory in that in that
place is where the machines are this is
the old machine it's right now working
you see the the smoke this is the
machine from 1950 and this is the newer
machine and that's one of the mechanics
the machine is stopped and if he's there
is because machine is not working
because he was one of the guys fixing it
and you can see paper is not coming out
and the challenge that the workers have
here was ready to make work to very old
machines and make a living out of that
and they really have been showing a lot
of ingenuity in doing that this is the
process of of making paper any machine
works like through this process but the
newer machines are much faster and you
need less people demand and that the
machines that they have but they have
made innovations to all sorts to all the
stages in the process they have I cannot
describe them I don't have much time but
in all stages of this process of
producing papers they have made
innovations to the machine to make them
work continuously and to make them work
faster
and to increase the quality of the paper
and that's a source of a lot of pride
when you talk to them and weigh in all
my interviews and beseech they they
always made a point of showing me what
they have done to make the the machines
work and to make sure that they continue
working because their big problem was
that the machines were breaking down and
stopping all the time and they were
losing you know money out of that but at
the same time the machines as I said our
old and in order to make a living they
are very slow compared to new machines
in the paper industry and in order to
make a living they have to work 12-hour
shifts so it's on the one hand a lot of
ingenuity a lot of creativity in making
these things work on the other hand very
strenuous is not strain was because the
work is not strenuous it's mostly boring
with moments of in which they have to
rush but mostly they're just their
worship watching the machine work but
it's being 12 hours they are day in and
day out and that's pretty pretty
difficult now moving quickly to the
foodstuff factory the foot out here too
many computers the foodstuffs factory
was a newer one the workers occupied it
because they were the owners try to they
try to close it and reopen and I under a
different name to you know get out of
debt so they wanted to just say that
they went bankrupt and reopen it but the
workers saw this coming so they occupy
the factory and they didn't let the
owners take the machines out and at some
point they decided what we had enough we
are going to make this work and this was
a much newer factory this demesne and it
was a leading factory in its in its in
its field they we do confection
I mean they produce chocolate are things
for confectionery production and they
produce ice cream inputs and what the
workers know there what the workers i
have to do was to try to recuperate
previous recover previous markets but
they also again one of the points of
pride here was all the innovations that
make to the machines this were the
machine this is where they make
chocolate they make chocolate too you
know icing cakes and none of those
things and they have been making
modifications so they can work faster I
mean it's not shown here but they have
wrap around all those things they wrap
around house is to make sure that the
heating system works better they have
built new machines copying machines that
they have they have reordered the work
place to make work easier I put his
picture there because one of the tasks
that he took upon himself was to develop
new ice cream tastes and that was his
initiative so again in this factory
again self-management led to a lot of
creative input today talking with them I
went to the hospital I don't have time I
talking with them they always emphasize
how before when they were working for
the owners they would they would bring
their initiatives and nobody would hear
them and now they have all the space to
be creative and to use their practical
knowledge put their practical knowledge
into work and appropriate work and space
here work was less was less strenuous
because they weren't operating in full
capacity and they were they had a kind
of flexible specialization model in
people will rotate between the sections
according to the man so rather than the
boring work on the paper making machines
here the work was much less much more
body edited and much less boring and
they work eight-hour shift so again I
don't have time to talk about the
hospital but just to finish very quickly
all that i saw in these places and the
other places that i haven't talked about
self-management provide workers with
opportunities to exercise their
practical knowledge in the design of
work and the work space but they are
constrained by the technology that they
encounter by the pressures from the
market and also and i couldn't talk
about this here by the kind of
self-organization that they give to
themselves so if these are pre
figurative experiences that we can learn
form in thinking about organizing new
workplaces that's the kind of thing that
we should think about how to overcome in
terms of boundaries to the possibility
of creativity in the workplace you know
how to deal with pressures of markets
and with the limits of technology to
make work really an experience where
people PhDs or just you know people who
just barely finished high school or
didn't finish high school can employ all
their practical knowledge and their
creative knowledge into making the work
place amor la salle united place in a
more creative workplace so mostly i stop
thanks so much so should we just finish
up with the colony Jonah do a few
questions or should we take questions
from floor and then are you an idea of
some good wow
stay back here so I just to to kind of
try to connect some of the threads
between these talks I so I think there's
an over here how's it talk more quietly
so I think there's a sense among people
who who spent a lot of time thinking
about work thinking about labor within
the labor movement that there's kind of
a crisis of vision and I feel like a lot
of the talks that we've seen are trying
to address that in different ways either
revised proposals for alternatives or
suggestions for directions in which to
move and that there's a sense that we
want a future of work that's more
egalitarian because what worked for most
of us at the moment means is spending a
large fraction of our waking lives doing
things that we don't really find very
meaningful but really the last person to
articulate an egalitarian vision of work
that achieved any kind of real
mainstream traction was Karl Marx and
there's a lot that's changed in terms of
the the material conditions of work
since 1867 then you know since then
you've got people like like Andre gorse
Peter phrase now come to mind who
articulate this much narrower vision so
those are people who are saying that
well you know we want to strengthen
unions we want
reduced working hours you want to push
for full employment but beyond that we
we don't want to think too far ahead
because we risk falling into this kind
of Nassim Taleb type idea that some
other speakers have referenced where the
the future is unpredictable and we don't
want to to risk dreaming up these kind
of fantastical recipes for cooktops of
the future so what what I'm wondering is
it with regards to the the material that
you presented how do you feel that that
it might scale or that that we might get
there so in the case of self-managed
work in Argentina you've got a number of
instances of places where locally it
seems like workers have had some success
in achieving this more egalitarian mode
of operating and there there's this kind
of implicit suggestion that this is a
model that would be well used elsewhere
that we could try to scale this up as
something that would apply to how we
work more generally i'm i'm wondering if
if if you have any kind of Boulder maybe
more fantastical visions for for how
that might work that you'd like to share
I mean I think that if you look at you
know even even if we look at the US and
her driven her car line and we know
about the Cleveland cooperatives and we
know about other places in which
cooperatives are coming I mean the
Solidarity economy is much bigger in the
u.s. than we think it just doesn't get
any price you know where when I talk
about this sample it has been worth but
increase you know this world or in that
other place this this kind of
experiences are taking place all over I
mean you know in Argentina you know it's
small but the point is really too so we
know and learn them of all this
expensive we can learn the lessons and
really get the idea out so people know
that it's a possibility is it's a
different legal framework in Argentina
than here I mean in Argentina it is
possible for workers to say to owners
you know we've had enough here no so so
there are very differences there I mean
there are our place in Latin America
where it is also possible to do that but
here there are cases you know in which
bin Isa qualities or unions by factories
from their owners so there are different
ways the question really is and I think
that this is a I'd really like this
panel it's ready to learn from the
multiple experience if all the fun these
are pre figurative experiences if all
this you know tell us about the kind of
institutions that can support this type
of offer I think that then the question
is yet to learn from the different
things then what have been the
difficulties and learn what have been
the achievements and keep and put the
word out so people know that this is a
and an opportunity is available and
people know that there are many other
people doing it that currently they
don't know so should we just come throw
out to the panel earth to the audience
to ensure that everyone's got a
opportunity so you will put hand up
and ian's got to mikes can somebody just
cover the other side can I get one of
you young helpful healthy people yep
should we take a cluster of questions
and then okay Zach Jonna oh sorry so I
just had a question because um in
today's world's a lot of become means
like you have to be able to work
internationally or walk Oh work across
borders or even if you're just looking
at workers with domestic helpers who
come over from different parts of the
world i'm from the philippines in hong
kong which has that kind of relationship
how do you envision this working across
borders okay did you take customer
questions and then come back next season
yeah anyone else do you put your hand up
so that I was really impressed by all
the talks but Caroline isn't yeah you're
talking particularly made me think that
you pointed to an overhaul of value
systems and I wonder how design can
participate in making a shift from large
scale and quantity to small scale and
quality in the insane spirit name to
Caroline's talk and the question came to
me looking at your talk so it seems like
challenges to redefine I mean what could
be to ask for more or you know sort of
in praise the problem in terms of
problem of Rights that workers have
rights right the other Avenue could be
to redefine what work is and challenge
the difference between working and
thinking right so I'm i was reminded of
rancier is you know Knights of Labor
it's like one of the divisions that
capitalism creates is between those who
are you know imagined or Centrify to
think and those who work so workers
can't drink but then he comes up with
all this evidence
19th century France were crushing their
poetic clubs of poetry and writing and
literature and debate right this is just
seen as a mature hobby work these people
are staying up at night you know giving
up their sleep after exhausting and
doing this stuff right so workers while
working in a factory retooling a factory
right they are thinking but the tools of
recognizing because of the tools to
recognize thinking that we have
currently see that as sort of some sort
of unconscious craft kind of thing that
you know happens because they know the
Machine through some sort of bodily
relationship right so and creativity we
have elevated on this pedestal that you
know how the creative thinker thinks all
the time they don't think between nine
and five all of you supposed to work in
late in the studio no whenever the idea
just stands in your mind give all but
workers 95-90 recognize work between 95
also as creative it now so as oh okay
should we take those three so we've got
the question of sky oh how much how much
can we scale up which I suppose you guys
back scotland's question question of
borders and flowers and how do we think
about organizing social relationships
and United States which market I'll I
didn't work global division of labor is
very problematic at the other end and
then finally creative thinking making
and thinking can we bridge I can so I
think it is an enormous crisis to try
and imagine confronting dignified work
with borderless flows of capital and one
group that I'm inspired by in New York
started in Argentina actually the
working world so I think a lot of it can
come down to financing and that's why i
love looking at the Solidarity economy
diagram because you can see how
financing is tied into the workplace and
the kinds of exchange that are possible
so in the same way that I'm part of a
group starting a real estate investment
cooperative for permanently affordable
commercial space in New York
city you can think about investment
cooperatives for technology because a
lot of the issues come down to financing
if the values are not aligned in the
financing with the outcomes for workers
often it becomes impossible for the
business to share benefits with workers
and then in terms of values and thinking
about work as work unfortunately or
fortunately because we're in this kind
of cultural value debate where impact is
measured by returns in terms of profit
students are also understanding their
own debt burden as something that
necessitates future monetary return and
therefore they understand themselves as
workers which is the double-edged sword
of this neoliberal model of Education so
because we then don't get the jobs our
debt made us hope we would receive we
are now ready to mobilize I think more
and more with other working people and
to realize that unless we all strike
join forces and we too will have jobs
that are not dignified and lots of debt
on top of it well I think the first
maybe to the question of the
cross-border labor or cross-border work
so I think one thing to keep in mind is
that so what I was proposing is
basically like a worker ownership right
or worker cooperatives are unions at the
center of these platforms right so in
that sense they are of course determined
you know by the nation-state I mean so
that city doesn't have to be cross
border and that's in that sense because
the ownership isn't it see cooperative
right so and that has to can also be
local and actually the discussion of
scale comes quite importantly into that
as well because the scale is always in
such a sort of in a way like a
neoliberal imperative fight that it
always has to be scaled up everything is
to always grow and be big right so often
cooperatives actually don't have that
parative at all they so they are quite
happy to stay confined right but there
are examples maybe in the let's say in
the to go with this with the
crowdsourcing examples I gave where
international the operating companies
likely genius for example found ways of
addressing discussion of how to put on
an ethical I think essica labor
practices by paying minimum wages
according to the country in which the
worker resides for example and so this
it's not impossible to address that but
I think yeah I think on the question of
scaling out mean there are there there
have been meetings at the Latin American
level of worker owned enterprises in
which people have come together trying
to build a movement with different
degrees of success there are also models
of just rate solidarity in which groups
have bought products from different
factories in order to create markets I
mean one of the problems of this
enterprises is market so you know just
trade models are things that work but in
terms of creativity i mean you know i
mean what i was trying to say is really
that self management is a space for
creativity and for for people to use all
their accumulated practical knowledge to
put it to use in ways that are quite
innovative in designing products
designing space designing machines
designing the work process they are
limited to that by the needs but what
they have at hand and they need to
produce with that but it but i don't
know if i was sufficiently clear but
what i have found in this in this
enterprises is that the possibility of
self-management open space for
creativity and that level which is not
the poetry or reno writing books but is
the knowledge that workers have in
and applying it in a way that is very
breaking the boundaries of alienation in
the sense of the relationship of the
worker with the work with the word
process so I just going to throw in
question here which ism it is not the
problem that design has here is that a
lot of contemporary design has
circumscribed its ambition and
circumscribed its form of education so
that the kind of things you're talking
about here are redesigning institutions
you know at larger scales but a lot of
design education looks at that prospect
now and goes huh I can't do it and so
it's not just a matter of I mean the
financing is there as well but there's
been a narrowing of design there's been
a narrowing of its its its historical
relationship with with the social
sciences the liberal arts the applied
practice social movements so one of the
dilemmas that we have is that you know
the liberal arts had no praxis design
has very delimited ambition and we need
to shake that up and maybe have
something much more encompasses its kind
of bring about the kinds of scalar
changes that you're talking about that
is that possible so I would love to see
all elite expensive institutions and
also semi affordable public institutions
have required Community Benefit
agreements with the groups that they're
often displacing and we've seen this
slightly at Columbia in New York City
but this would be a way to acknowledge
that especially if you do service
learning courses you'll have a
relationship to the value that your
local partners create and that you are
committed also financially to their
success and their stability in the
neighborhood and I think in New York
City we've seen a lot with the New York
City Community Land initiative working
on land Trust's with partnerships that
are at CUNY with academics who provide
expertise in their courses for this
movement which is by the way led by
formerly and current homeless people and
there are many working groups for
education
our self managed so it's not a
distinction there's actually a community
of academics and people directly
impacted by homelessness working
together educating ourselves and
designing together guy just quickly what
I have to say that the reason I brought
up scale I was thinking about student
debt I'm extremely sensitive to the
issue if universities stopped having to
build new buildings if universities
didn't think they had to provide food
courts would you come they say no I I
wonder i really wonder i have no idea
the conundrum here and damian your point
is exactly correct we're instrumental
even the new school which has a
reasonably decent idea or itÃµs is
instrumental izing design as a 0 list
all the jobs your students gets I think
university should have a warning no job
guaranteed I tell my students you always
have to have two jobs I spent the first
26 years of my life in a so-called dream
job in a museum that was just a slog
before I backed into my current job
where I make twenty dollars an hour at
65 so and I did it it by choice though I
could have easily met jozin another path
we have to remember the choices are
there so students aren't duped parents
are duped they choose to buy the fiction
speaking of fiction that there's a job
waiting for someone and that is not true
i'm just we're cutting it to lunch time
coming cannot bring you back carolyn and
anyone else daniel down the back if you
got a mic yeah okay let's bring daniel
in okay Caroline I had a question for
you we had a conversation a while ago
about this problem that many artists run
organizations in cal
when they move from being on back here
by the way I saw you searching from from
a voluntary labor system to paid labor
and then have to differentiate between
what the various members feel they
should be paid and I'm wondering whether
in you're talking about artists finding
solidarity with other workers if there
are differences to you in artists labor
that get lost in in that in that in that
meeting I don't think it's an attempt to
unify all labor it's simply an attempt
to show that artists are workers and
therefore we have demands and some of
those demands overlap with other groups
demands so for example in Denmark
there's a very successful visual artists
union that's working right now and the
way they work is they only target
artists who they call the non employed
workers of public charity and this is
important because artists are often not
employed at all there's no contract
therefore you cannot be unemployed
because you were never employed so when
they call out public charities which get
subsidies for non employed work they are
very effective and additionally what
they're able to do is collect all of the
artists fees through one pool so say for
example I'm paid for today it would go
through the visual artists union they
take a small amount and then they pay me
back out at minimum wage and what that
allows is for me to be unemployed when
I'm getting no gigs because I suddenly
don't have that minimum wage and it also
shows me that I make minimum wage and
lets me think about the fight for 15 and
other things that are related so that's
one example that works in Denmark for a
visual artists union and of course there
are many distinctions and I just think
as we see more and more oppression for
generations that are young often with
student debt which we could call the
generation
future if we look at Spain to borrow
that term I think we are going to be
very angry when the next bailout happens
and we've paid back our debts by
changing our lives and I think older
parents don't often realize what it's
like to have this much student debt and
I did go to a school with no food court
and no condominium dreams for my luxury
future I went to Cooper Union we had no
dorms and no food cordon unfortunately
when they built the new building but
this is because institutions are
financed by century bonds that are sold
to construction companies and so until
we stop the luxury condominium vision
but the thing is we will stop ourselves
because those bonds are sold on the
belief that it will outperform the Dow
so the collapse is coming we just have
to be prepared ok I think I went at the
last word i'll just give colin last
words do you wanna have much work were
you ok yeah i actually want to turn it
back to Caroline though again because
you you mentioned a few times the
importance of organizing and that's
something that I think can't be
overemphasized organization is a basic
prerequisite for every other tool in our
kit really our only advantages our
strength in numbers and desperation but
at the same time predominantly for the
the universally the entire history of
work the main venue for organization
among workers has been unions and it is
abundantly clear that while you really
can't overstate how important unions
have been historically if you like
having a weekend thank unions despite
all the bad rapid they get these days
but at the same time were clearly in the
climb and it seems to be a model that's
breaking and so in light of that but
also in light perhaps of the fact that
we have access to to to some new
institutions some new technologies I'm
wondering if you have ideas for how
workers might be able to organize
themselves now in a way that can rival
the power of what the union's used to be
because something at least that strong
is going to be necessary so can I just
say that that is the question that we
will have to return to it's a great
question so we'll leave their fantastic
panel wasn't that interesting yeah and
interestingly you're an institution that
has strong unions but we won't go into
that um we are breaking for lunch and we
will return at 210 they're on there
should be a food truck outside you have
a list of restaurants and for the
privileged few please follow me I will
meet your needs okay thank you very much
