yes
the first session is titled aesthetics
and environmental engagement
sustainability and the initial questions
that we posed to the speakers is what is
the role of aesthetics in environmental
art any difference between practice of
environmental activism and environmental
art but I asked each speaker to just
take it and run with it because I wanted
to you know each speaker to get at it
from different perspectives and the
first speaker is Arnold valiant
professor emeritus of a long ride on the
University so I know as I mentioned I'm
doing away with thanks the introduction
because I will take 15 minutes so
I think we are debt of gratitude to the
organizers of the symposium and it's
been going on for so so long in such an
important project for the organizers and
the participants and the delighted that
is finally reached its flowering
and I hope this will serve as a kind of
overall orientation to what we're doing
when I first reflected on the title of
the symposium I thought it could be read
as an invitation to critique the
academic practice of aesthetics as a
scholarly discipline to identify its
limitations its subservience to
fashionable academic ideologies its
alienation from the much of what was and
is being done by artists and of all
sorts and traditions past as well as
present such a critique would serve a
useful purpose certainly but its value
would have been largely negative and
might have induced the imaginative
format of the symposium to descend to
the level of intellectual bickering
reminiscent of philosophical conferences
at the same time the title of the
symposium is suggestive perhaps too
suggestive for questioning aesthetics
can mean several different things one
perhaps the most obvious is raising
questions about the field of aesthetics
what issues should aesthetics be
concerned with what values does
aesthetics center around and how does
their relevance vary where does
aesthetics belong in the domain of a
scholarship
what kind of theoretical account can
best capture the workings of the
aesthetic questioning aesthetics here
means questioning the discipline surely
a purgative process that is useful for
any discipline but there is another
meaning an adjective meeting meaning in
questioning aesthetics it is to consider
aesthetics as an inquiry that questions
by its very nature a questioning
aesthetics aesthetics as a distinct
kind of questioning is that at the
questioning what is the particular
character of the aesthetic that places
things in question how does aesthetics
question what kind of questioning is the
aesthetic and especially especially
capable of doing it is I think a
questioning that judges by an aesthetic
standard that is it starts from sensory
experience and evaluates things by
perceptual criteria as Michael said it
instead of said to do with its sense
perception Sensibility sensation of what
specifically is esthetics an appropriate
critique of what specifically is
aesthetics an appropriate critique here
its scope is boundless and aesthetics
quickly becomes a critique of the human
world of its institutions its practices
its justices and in justices its sense
of things on the basis of the perceptual
conditions they inhabit and promote what
might such a critique reveal what might
it lead where mightily if aesthetics
became the questioner what is an
aesthetics that questions the edge'
title meaning assigns a critical
function to aesthetics it suggests that
this X can be the basis of a social or a
political critique in evaluating
practices by their consequences for the
sensible world of human life there is an
implicit humanism here for the
qualitative perceptual richness of
experience becomes the standard of
judgment in a sense these two meanings
of questioning aesthetics may be
inseparable because a questioning
esthetics suggests an answer to the
question of what aesthetics is that lets
this seem too convoluted let me suggest
how the questioning of and
Erick's relates to the subject of this
first session environmental engagement
and sustainability both engagement and
sustainability embody ethical concerns
the first about the contribution of
aesthetic experience to the quality of
living in the second about the ways of
life that sustain a balance between
production and consumption a balance
that is increasingly fractured and
threatened to the point of rendering the
future of human life precarious our
faith in a technological fits for the
life of excels of excess has reached the
blank wall of impossibility
when exhausted resources cannot be
replenished and environmental changes
cannot be reversed we are facing the
fact that we are whether we cannot
insulate ourselves from the consequences
of unrestrained environmental
consumption and careless depredation the
fact is that we have become consumers of
environment and are obliterating the
very ground of our sustenance
hence the inescapable criterion of
sustainability which implies a concern
for attending to the aesthetic values
inherent in the survival of civilization
values civilizations that are
necessarily human and morally humane
indeed the very subjective of survival
requires a concern for environment and
just as the survival of civil human
civilization requires safeguarding
aesthetic values I'm sorry if I seem to
be puzzling over my text but the light
is very bad here and I can't see my own
pages so I hope
oh that's a hell thank you I should have
complained earlier this suggests an
answer to where we began in questioning
aesthetics and and for several reasons
one is that a challenge is the tradition
that can finds aesthetic value to night
natural beauty and the arts environment
is more than striking scenery and
accommodating landscape design it
denotes a contextual condition that
implicates and includes the human
perception environment is a collection a
collective term for the multiple
settings of human life activity and
their dystopic manifestations as well as
the benign ones
environment is not an extent external
distant object or phenomenon and the
arts are more than objects indications
for delectation since the enter into the
way the very substance of human life
experience both the arts and environment
are conditions of aesthetic engagement
so the second form of aesthetic
questioning a questioning esthetics
introduces the need for normative
criteria it invites us to identify in
the range of aesthetic perception values
that are negative and powerful in
environmental conditions and experience
and those values that enlarge and in
lurch enrich our life experiences and
lead us into harmony with the world we
create and inhabit
thus a questioning aesthetics gives
aesthetic values and can gives us that
Excel use and concerns central
importance for the ubiquity of aesthetic
perception implicates the further the
full range of normative experience in
the normative question introduces is
that issues concerning the negative
domains of aesthetics and necessity for
aesthetic criticism of environmental
experience a questioning aesthetics is
therefore fundamental for it promotes
inquiry grounded on and in our
perceptual world when aesthetics
questions everything responds I expect
we shall hear some of these answers
these two days thank you thank you
Arnold next speaker is Emily Brady from
Universal University of Edinburgh
oh well thank you Arnold for kicking
that off with such an interesting just
interesting comments I was jotting
things down the whole time and I'd like
to thank Yuriko Michael and the others
involved in organizing this event it's a
really a great to have been invited to
speak here I think I'll be giving you
something a bit different but perhaps a
sort of segue between Arnold's talk and
Patricia's talk as well across academia
and the wider public current debates
about climate change as well as the
concept of the Anthropocene have
emphasized the need for thinking long
term and intergenerationally
environmental aesthetics given its
interest in environment is an is in an
ideal position to explore what I will
call intergenerational aesthetics
intergenerational aesthetics makes
demands on us to perceive and imagine
from the present to the past and to the
future and beyond through our
connections to geology ecology and the
cosmos to explore intergenerational
aesthetics here today I'm going to focus
on the particular themes of cosmology
and time I begin with some scene setting
from eighteenth-century aesthetics
before bringing these themes into
dialogue with environmental aesthetics I
conclude with a look at three art
practices that for me figure as openers
for intergenerational aesthetics to work
with in my 15 minutes coverage of these
ideas will necessarily be pretty brief
at least because of emerging interest in
the science of human nature and natural
history 18th century philosophers in
Britain and the continent write
generously not only about the arts but
also about the natural world nature is
certainly a contested concept today and
in the 18th century too it has many
meanings including religious ones
especially when we look back to the 18th
century for example nature with an
uppercase n is used by Shaftesbury to
denote the cosmological whole that is
divine creation when nature with the
capital n is used to describe the
natural world as created by God for
Hutcheson and 18th century philosophers
this also included nature with a small n
the empirical reality of the universe
mountains rivers insects mammals plants
and natural environments of sky sea land
and so on what I find intriguing about
these historical approaches is that
aesthetic value works alongside
scientific discoveries of their day
which means that they often approach
aesthetics more holistically as I shall
show through cosmological and temporal
qualities Francis Hutchison's empiricist
approach articulates Beauty grasped
graphs grasped by an aesthetic sense
through perception that is immediate
rather than mediated by cognition or
knowledge his method for examining
natural beauty begins with forms and
patterns that we understand through
mathematics astronomy and the other
sciences yet he is clear that the mark
of beauty which he calls uniformity
amidst variety has experienced through
the aesthetic sense rather than through
knowledge there maintaining thereby
maintaining a non cognitive sort of
approach partition shows a genuine
interest in harmony and order and his
account of natural beauty turns out to
be holistic prioritizing unities above
particulars this is expressed for
example through temporal relations in
cosmology and across the Earth's seasons
he says
what can exhibit a greater instance of
uniformity amidst variety than the
constant tenor of revolutions in nearly
equal times in each planet around its
access and the central fire or Sun
through all the ages of which we have
any records the alternate successions of
light and shade or day and night
constantly pursuing each other around
each planet with an agreeable and
regular diversity in the times they
possess the several hemispheres in the
summer harvest winter and spring and the
various phases aspects and situations of
the planets to each other their
conjunctions and opposition's in which
they suddenly darken each other with
their conic shapes and eclipses are
repeated to us at their fixed periods
with invariable constancy these are the
beauties which charm the astronomer and
make the tedious calculations Pleasant
moving on to the rather sketchy theory
of the sublime offered by Hume we find
that the mind is elevated by the
vastness of its object and still farther
elevated by the difficulty of the
conception and being obliged every
moment to renew its efforts in the
transition from one part of time to
another feels a more vigorous and
sublime disposition than in a transition
through the parts of space the
imagination gives us a proportionable
veneration for it this temporal sublime
is both backward and forward looking
referring to ancient history but also to
Eternity and thus capturing phenomena
stretching far into the future while
Hume focused on the example of antiquity
to convey his notion it can easily be
applied to landscapes indeed also during
the Scottish enlightenment John Blake
John Playfair a set of James Hutton's
concept of deep time a notion of
geologic time measuring the age of the
earth that quote the minds seemed to
grow giddy by looking so far into the
abyss of time and here an image of
siccar point which is an important site
for Hutton's theory
I could say much more about time and
cosmology in the history of aesthetics
but because time is short I now bring
these ideas into dialogue with
environmental aesthetics in order to
motivate intergenerational aesthetics
intergenerational aesthetics takes time
seriously it engages with the temporal
dynamic character of aesthetic qualities
concepts and phenomena it seeks to make
explicit the ways in which humans are
diachronic ly intertwined with
ecological geological and sentient
others in these ways it encourages long
term thinking requiring us to perceive
and imagine beyond present lives
environmental aesthetics is largely
concerned with a more environmental
situated approach for example in a
forest of sequoia trees we find complex
ecosystems involving various forms of
interactions as well as growth decay the
effects of weather the seasons and so on
the born more dynamic characters of
environments and ecology shaped the
range of aesthetic qualities we find and
reveal how these qualities change over
time in light of various factors we
witness the rapid change in the life and
death of an exquisite mayfly or the
relatively slow change of glacial
erosion the temporal aspect of
individual life spans Ecology's and
geologies requiring us to engage with
aesthetic phenomena more holistically
and at least in terms of a past and
future we can find a model for this on a
more compressed scale when Holmes
Ralston asks us to appreciate the beauty
of an elk carcass within the broader
ecological story where decomposition
leads to new life and many of us here
know that Yuriko Saito our chair and
brilliant symposium core organizer has
written extensively about the role of
time and change in the interface between
environmental and Japanese aesthetics we
also find environmental thinkers and
conservationists who recognize time
depth a significant in shaping aesthetic
and other values Jon mirrors expertise
as a geologist and botanist
him firsthand knowledge of the passage
of time and its effects on things he
says rising at the upper end of the
valley to a height of nearly a mile is
nobly proportioned and lifelike the most
impressive of all rocks holding the eye
in devout admiration calling it back
again and again from the Falls or
meadows or even the mountains beyond
marvelous cliffs marvelous and sheer
dizzy depth and sculpture types of
endurance thousands of years have they
stood in the sky exposed to rain snow
frost earthquake and Avalanche yet they
still wear the bloom of youth in the
sand County Almanac Aldo Leopold
presents an intimate record of the
ecology and beauty of a place across a
year and in his moving allergy of the of
a marshland lost agriculture we find
deep time a sense of time life thick and
heavy on such a place yearly since the
Ice Age it has awakened each spring to
the clangor of cranes the peat layers
that comprise the bog are laid down in
the basin of an ancient lake the cranes
stand as it were upon the sodden pages
of their own history these pits are the
compressed remains of the mosses that
clogged the pools of the tamaracks that
spread over the moss of the ice sheet an
endless caravan of generations has built
of its own bones this bridge into the
future this habitat where the oncoming
host again may live and breed and die
time also plays out across the aesthetic
judgments and preferences made during a
person's life or community's life or
shifts in landscape tastes across
generations
the combination of temporal change on
both sides in aesthetic qualities and
subject matter as well as in
appreciation makes environmental
aesthetics I think an especially
fruitful ground for developing
intergenerational aesthetics
my ideas in the talk are inspired by
thinking about past and future
generations in philosophical discussions
of climate change in moving on to art
practice I won't be engaging with the
large field of an of climate change in
the arts rather I want to look at three
cases of environmental art loosely
defined which highlight cosmology time
and the geological and thereby express
the intergenerational rather than the
merely present let's begin with the
heavens above many here will be familiar
with James Torah James Turrell rotten
crater a massive sky observatory being
constructed within an extinct volcano in
the Arizona desert which will give
observers a chance to participate in
celestial events through a range of
Terell sky escapes and other light rooms
many different aesthetic values will
likely be at work here such as the
beautiful the sublime wonder and others
Rawdon crater rod and creator website
describes it in this way while minimally
invasive to the external natural
landscape internally the red and black
stint cinder has been transformed into
special engineered spaces where the
cycles of geologic and celestial time
can be directly experienced a trope
which looks to the earth and then that
rather than sky in space is familiar in
Robert Smithson's work his fascination
with the unseen ik the ruined and the
post-industrial pays tribute to the
relentless inevitable forces of nature
especially entropy and geological change
his most famous work Spiral Jetty
spirals 1,500 feet into the Great Salt
Lake near the shore at brasil' point
this work is dynamic rather than static
depending on the water level of the lake
it submerges Andry emerges it's now
covered with eye crisp ice crystals at
least the last time that I checked the
artwork operates on various levels from
the sheer physicality of the spiral to
the expansive lake sight with long
stretches of water and land to ideas
about the earth creation and math
Smithson described the site in evocative
terms as I looked at the site it
reverberate it out to the horizons only
to suggest an immobile cyclone while
flickering light made the entire
landscape appear to quake a dormant
earthquake spread into the fluttering
stillness into a spinning sensation
without movement the site was a rotary
that enclosed itself in an immense
roundness from that gyrating space
emerged the possibility of Spiral Jetty
no ideas no concepts no systems no
structures no abstractions could hold
themselves together in that actuality in
the actuality of that evidence this
description is striking for the way it
captures greatness in a metaphysical
mode tinged with the uncertainty and
energy of geological forces Smith's ins
work did not hold nature at a distance
natural forces affect human actions and
human structures partially buried
woodshed in which he took 20 cartloads
of Earth this is quote 20 cartloads of
Earth and piled them on this woodshed
until the central beam cracked was
motivated in part by an interest in
quote dealing with the unexpected and
incorporating that into community the
woodshed resonates with the Buried
architecture of houses and villages
buried in ashes from volcanic eruptions
and for some expresses the ruptures and
disintegration of 1960s America Smith's
ins work is able to speak across the
temporal divide of short-term and
long-term thinking as well as the human
nature divide he urges us to reconnect
with the land through time and recognize
how entropy and he recognizes how
entropy runs through nature cultures my
third and final illustration is the
artist Elana Halperin who works with
processes of the earth as her art
practice engages intimately with
geological processes and the people who
work with him on a daily basis in her
artists statement she writes my work
explores the relationship between
geological phenomena and daily life
weather boiling milk and a hundred
degrees Celsius sulfur spring in the
crater of an active volcano
or celebrating my birthday with a land
mass of the same age the geologic
history and environmental situation
specific to the locale directly informs
the direction each piece takes recent
projects take as a starting point a
personal experience with an unexpected
geological phenomenon increasingly
interconnected events of a political
historical and everyday nature are
progressively drawn together to form a
narrative each story explores the
changeable nature of land mass using
geology as a language to understand
understand our relationship to a
constantly evolving world there are many
other artists who take time and the
geological to the center of their work
drawing our attention to what lies above
around us and also beneath our feet with
these three art practices I bring to a
close this rather brief look at how we
might formulate intergenerational
aesthetics by drawing on ideas from the
history of aesthetics from environmental
aesthetics and also from the arts my
hope is that this will open up a future
aesthetics for future aesthetics thank
you
Thank You Emily
a lot our speaker is Patricia Johansen
whose box may be familiar to many of you
yes
this feels good so I'm an artist with no
background in philosophy and I'll try to
answer three questions and then present
some of my own work first is there any
difference between environmental
activism and environmental art and I
believe there is a huge difference
because while art can incorporate an
activist agenda the goals and practice
of environmental activism do not produce
the work of art although all human
beings have an innate appreciation of
color form light and shadow and
compositional relationships and I use
these elements as an artist to draw
people into a dialogue with nature but
as an environmental activist I need to
persuade people of the value of seeing
beyond their own immediate interests by
leading more sustainable lives and
preserving nature itself and my strategy
for promoting this ethical dimension is
to frame the natural world within an
aesthetic context and let people form
their own relationships second what is
the role of aesthetics in my work that
distinguishes it from environmental
remediation done by biologists or
engineers art is always about the
relationship between what is created and
the people experiencing it so while my
art projects may achieve the same
remedial results in terms of purifying
water restoring species and reconnecting
ecosystems and while the work of
restoration ecologist can be stunningly
beautiful such as the restored Prairie
our goals are entirely different human
beings and their aesthetic experiences
are at the center of my work it is the
sculptural form bright colors and
large-scale configurations that draw
people in whereas most scientifically
oriented professionals are disinterested
in how their sites are experienced or
composed in fact they're restored sites
are often
nerves we're human visitation is
discouraged since people are considered
the problem third what is the role of
aesthetics in environmental art sensory
perception is fundamental to all human
beings and it is the aesthetic elements
in my work that first catch people's
attention stimulating their own
imaginations and encouraging them to
explore my projects but like an engineer
or scientist I have goals and I'm
ultimately interested in results
aesthetics plays a crucial role in my
environmental projects by engaging the
audience encouraging them to form
personal connections and leading them
into a dialogue with ancillary issues
such as the lives of animals and the
importance of wildlife habitat
preserving endangered species and
framing large-scale infrastructure as
environmental sculpture and
multifunctional public parks one of my
earliest projects iris field from 1970
organized three forest ecologies by
means of a continuous line of materials
while preserving the natural setting
intact each material was aesthetically
related to the color and texture of its
surroundings creating a pattern
interwoven with the existing landscape
marble was juxtaposed with white birch
trees redwood was camouflaged against a
carpet of red needles within a dense
pine forest and flowing configurations
of cement block undulate over hilly
topography by mediating between human
scale and the undifferentiated vastness
of nature cyrus field incorporates the
world around it transforming the woods
into an infinite series of ever-changing
compositions ecological and seasonal
colors and textures varying light and
weather conditions the reflected shadows
of leaves and clouds the contours of the
terrain all become part of the work of
art
over the years the project has inspired
a cadre of environmentalists by
engendering personal discoveries that
are unrelated to its formal design
animal burrows memento mori snakes frog
ponds and tiny landscapes that have
evolved on the sculpture as art and
landscape transform over time Fair Park
Lagoon and Dallas designed in 1981 seeks
the fusion of aesthetic form functional
infrastructure and living ecology where
every element is part of a larger system
whose parts are intricately related the
sculptural forms are designed to control
bank erosion by forming a continuous
line of defense the red segments of the
drawing preventing water from reaching
the Northshore which had previously been
eroding at the rate of eight inches a
year
the purple segments on the drawing
delineate a bulwark at the head of an
island an additional Bank armoring at
strategic points public paths over water
and arch bridges create micro habitats
for a wide variety of plants fish
turtles and birds the plants and animals
in turn become living educational
exhibits for the Dallas Museum of
Natural History
improve water quality and are consumed
and perpetuated as members of the food
chain the entire five block long lagoon
also serves as a municipal flood basin
thus familiar forms and paths of travel
are frequently altered by fluctuating
water levels the sculptural structures
provide a functional framework in which
over the past 35 years ecological
communities have evolved and life in all
its messy complication has proliferated
they also provide an aesthetic framework
with transient reflections such as the
mixing of blue sky and terracotta water
creates optical purple puddles where
birds may drink and so a lot of my work
is right out
but if you weren't trained as an artist
in color theory you might not see those
different colors the largely edible
successional landscape transient water
levels resident and migratory wildlife
populations and changing weather
conditions all contribute to the
impression of nature moving within art
and because the sculpture is based on
actual plants people who walk the paths
follow the varying curves and rhythms of
the biological forms repeating the
patterns of the living plant Fair Park
Lagoon is universally perceived as art
yet it provides a powerful connection to
the living world while fulfilling all
the functional requirements of an
engineered municipal flood basin in 1987
when I was asked to Co design a new 30
million dollar sewer for San Francisco
known as endangered garden my goal was
to restore and frame living systems and
make them available to the public
I began by burying the sewer and
converting the roof to a bay walk that
extends for 1/3 of a mile around
Candlestick cove with transitional
sculpture providing access to the
intertidal life of marsh mud flats and
longshore barriers fed the form chosen
for the art was the endangered San
Francisco garter snake whose linearity
and patterns meshed with a range of
habitats I wanted to create the head of
the snake became a 20 foot high earth
mound that protects butterflies from
cross winds and allows them to inhabit a
meadow filled with nectar and larval
host plants the snake's head echos
surrounding landforms San Bruno mountain
and the curving candlestick Cove
incorporating borrowed landscape into a
monumental snake image and visually
linking microcosm and macrocosm colors
reflect the site and its inhabitants
from the purple muscles and ribbon worms
seen in the intertidal zone to the light
of the bay and the living snake now part
of a California State Park
and the base circuit Trail few people
realized that sewage is underfoot Ellis
Creek water recycling facility 2001 to
2009 also known as Petaluma wetlands
park incorporates massive constructed
and natural wetlands into a
multi-purpose project that processes
sewage grows agricultural crops restores
wildlife habitat and produces recycled
water for miles of trails provide access
for recreation school programs and
nature study while simultaneously
containing pond water and furnishing
truck maintenance routes
despite its grounding and infrastructure
this has become pedal Lumas most popular
park inhabited by legions of wildlife
including eight threatened and
endangered species that have chosen to
make this their home biological autonomy
has been restored to the Petaluma site
by connecting it with surrounding
ecosystems while 45 acres of ponds
shaped like an endangered Mouse perform
human services within hundreds of acres
of restored mouse habitat so it's not
just an image we've restored over three
hundred acres of habitat for this
endangered Mouse within each pond and
these these are the eyes of the mouse
within each pond eyes direct the flow of
water as part of the sewage treatment
process but also serve as protected
nesting and refuge for birds while
morning-glory pools creates habitats
while cleansing stormwater from roads
and parking lots the project has
attracted a wide range of users
including recreational boaters who enter
the wetlands at high tide many people
assume that my images are added after
all the basic engineering and
environmental design has been completed
whereas actually these configurations
grow organically as solutions to design
problems in this case trail system water
circulation sewage process
storm water purification and wildlife
restorations which are all on the
mouse's footprint the final project the
draw at sugarhouse in Salt Lake City is
a Utah State Dam that channels
catastrophic floods down the stem of the
Saiga Lily under an eight-lane highway
through a narrow slot canyon the flood
walls and spillway for the dam and back
into an incised Creek flood water
overtopping the detention basin in
sugarhouse Park will pool in the bowl of
the flower with its 30-foot high walls
before flowing by gravity under the road
and through a sunken corridor as the
designer of the dam I know that anyone
who is not witnessed the construction
process will perceive this as a work of
art in fact the contractors themselves
were mesmerized by the prospect of
creating geological and sculptural
formations incorporating niches ledges
and purchase for wildlife and inserting
bat boxes in the pinnacle formations
visitors to Echo Canyon the spillway
that memorializes the journey of Mormon
pioneers through an historic landscape
are not experiencing an engineering
project in fact they are finding their
own ways to interact with the art like
all of my designs the draw is
simultaneously aesthetic ecological and
functional and will primarily be seen as
a public park and art into woven with
nature so what is the difference between
this project and for example the Hoover
Dam both are clearly sculptural
functional and engage in audience so in
terms of aesthetics they may only differ
in design intention and the
preconceptions of viewers where
environmental art distinguishes itself
is its ethical subtext while both dams
control water my Salt Lake City project
considers the larger community human and
non-human while the Hoover Dam is
sighs were disrupting the ecology of the
Colorado River and triggering numerous
endangered species beauty may lie in the
eye of the beholder but for an
environmental artist it is not only
aesthetics but also consequences that
count Thank You Patricia so what I am
going to do is to pose one question
which I think pertain to all the
speakers and ask them to respond and
then I won't take any more time my time
so I would like you people to engage in
discussion okay so what I sort of were
able to tease out of three presentation
is that there is that this sometimes
explicit sometimes implicit reference to
the ethical considerations whether it be
the sort of aesthetics being the tool to
or sensibility to make a judgement on
the quality of life or whether it be
placing our aesthetic experience in a
larger timeframe intergenerational
aesthetics or in Patricia's case are
very explicit intention of addressing
the ethical consideration particularly
the sustainability environmental
consideration so and this relationship
between the aesthetic and the ethical
that's been my main concern in my work
and in my teaching as well so do you
think that the the ethical ethical
consideration is kind of ubiquitous
surrounding aesthetic matters can there
be any aesthetics without reference to
or within the context of ethical concern
Taavi it's a to general question but you
can take it any way you want
so aesthetics seems to be ubiquitous I
mean that's clear because we are sensory
creatures always sort of interacting
with the environment through our senses
but within that sort of aesthetic
interaction with the environment is
there a sort of ethical anchor all the
time that we may not even realize so I
don't know whether that's it let me
start this is on let me start by saying
that it seems to be a very important
thing to be clear about from the very
very start talking about environmental
issues is to understand what an
environment is most people talk about
the environment as if it's something out
there that's a misnomer environment is
not out there it's here is here with us
in which we are apart so anything we do
that has environmental consequences
we're doing to ourselves it affects us
and consequently it has ethical import
but I think the the clear orientation of
understanding the significance of
environment for any such discussion is
to recognize that it's not something
apart from us it includes an
encapsulation beings thank you yeah do
you know so so I thought that was a
brilliant statement because when you
think about it you know there's a finite
amount of water you know and the same
water that the dinosaurs drank is
flowing through our bodies and passing
on to the whole whole system you know
and if you think about how just our own
bodies interact with everything it's
important to know that environmental it
is us and so it's just as an artist it
bothers me a lot when people I know
they're just like pointing things out
but when they do things that are
detrimental
make a point and you know instead of
fixing the problem they add to the
problem kind of thing and that's just my
own personal point of view mm-hmm but
you know I think it's important to you
know as an environmental artist to work
with the environment and fix things
yeah thank you
yeah it's so if I think I agree with
with what's been said already and uh but
as you know it's question you know super
and I suppose the the line I've always
told us that sure that ethics is
important but that it's not sort of
always explicit no static judgments in
our aesthetic engagement and and I
suppose that's because I I like to
perhaps I'm protective in a sense of
aesthetic engagement is something that
can have that pleasure and joy obviously
also connects values environmental
issues but that but I'm just to quickly
say you know the pleasure of being doing
some gardening and having a Robin you
know a foot away you know waiting
literally waiting for me to turn the
soil and and I can hear its little song
and so that to me that says something in
that moment that I you know into maybe
in a broad sense it ethical and I
suppose right yeah thank you all right
please from the audience and we'll ask
anyone to respond Jonathan
I'd like to hear more about temporality
Emily and
they're very important but then you want
to talk about in relationship to
intergenerational aesthetics which is a
kind of future oriented morality that's
you know that historical natural
temporality where there's processes
which either will or will not
continually disrupted in various ways
but it seems that the concern for
Futurity and intergenerational
aesthetics has to be thought of in
relationship to the dominant temporal
narrative of modernity in particular
which is a narrative of progress
progress a notion of temporality which
is a knot and all with a cyclical notion
of temporality but a unidirectional
notion of temporality and so I wonder if
you could speak some more about how that
there's a cyclical time
unidirectional time maybe conflict with
one
or I think we're going to talk about
that question
Patricia so thinking about that natural
we have cycles of change part of part of
the way any natural system works is it
doesn't remain static over rivers or it
changed the course species coming down
they take time quite a bit of time for
these changes that happen and I wonder
how you might incorporate those notions
of change and development into the
projects that you work on where they
appear to be sort of set up to be it's
done here it is and it's supposed to
just stay here and so it has a very kind
of humane static notion of time in a
project where it's and you want that you
want it to be kind of in reinitiation of
a sort of natural place
m-yeah you really took yeah yeah thanks
Jonathan um yeah I would say that I
think it should
intergenerational statics as I've been
developing this sort of idea as operates
on lots of different levels and I think
one level is that more immediate sensory
engagement with ecology so you know you
know the mayfly or again I thinking
about Erica's work and you know cherry
blossoms the image of the passage of
time as we see cherry blossoms dropping
some trees but then I think also on this
much longer sort of a synchronic sure
also diachronic and what I want to say
is that there's that more immediate
sensory that's one perhaps level or one
aspect of what I'm putting under this
idea of general intergenerational
aesthetics and that's kind of be shorter
periods of time but I'd also say in
terms of what I what I've also developed
an idea of future aesthetics which is
really I suppose part of this project
and future aesthetics is trying to think
about the aesthetic judgments of people
in future generations and in particular
respect to changes to landscapes that
are caused by climate change by human
induced climate change and in those
kinds of cases again I think we're
thrown in we are thrown into a sort of a
long-term thinking maybe concern and
care for what those experiences will be
liable future generations you know we we
may find for example that those few
generations have
some pretty wonderful experiences
because some species say you have
migrated north know that I can enjoy in
Scotland for example so so I'm not sure
if that's a great answer the question
but it's just trying to in a sense think
about these different levels in which
maybe it's working at okay so I'll try
but remember I'm only an artist you know
that's first of all if I don't believe
in progress I only believe in
transformation and so as an artist when
you create something implicit in that is
some kind of decision about the future
so for example when I did Cyrus field in
1970 you have to decide if it's an
outdoor piece are you going to maintain
it or are you not going to maintain it
and my decision was always to let nature
take its course
and I mean I didn't show you the most
radical transformations but some parts
of the sculpture now covered with soil
and so in the future there'll be an
archeological dig if anybody even knows
that it's there and that's the kind of
decision you make when you do public
work particularly functional
infrastructure it is going to be
maintained because it needs to be kept
in running order and so these are these
are aesthetic decisions that the artist
really makes partly when they when you
choose the project
yeah do you have anything to add I know
though I will it I will add one thing
which is there is no way we can possibly
know the future and so as an artist all
you can do is put something out there
that you believe in that you believe is
important and whether it survives or not
it's not up to you it's up to whether it
has meaning for the people who come
along later and whatever sordid world
you know they live in so there's no way
of knowing you just do what you want to
do what you think you should do I think
this is a complicated question actually
because on the one hand aesthetic
experiences is direct and immediate and
be present and on the other we're
talking about environmental actions and
changes that whose future we cannot know
we can predict but so we're changing the
world and therefore we're changing the
the future and we're changing our
experience because of the changes that
we're making so it's a complicated
interplay between present and and future
but of course depending upon your
philosophical orientation in the place
of time and all this is more or less
critical I think it's very critical let
me just edit that there's a temporal
element in the act of aesthetic
appreciation it's not a momentary thing
but it's a temporal process itself so
time is is it present day and all kinds
of levels mm-hm
yeah one of the things that I also
thought about you know from three
presentations is that exactly what you
said that aesthetic experience it's not
like aha and then that's it no it's it's
a process and and I think part of the
what I got out of or your presentation
is that it's it's a kind of like
practice that we should engage in
to cultivate the sort of aesthetic
sensibility so that we can have a I
don't want to say better but maybe
richer experience or deeper experience
by but at the same time it goes back to
the sensuous the surface the colors and
shapes and line and textures so it's
sort of always interplay between what
you know literally is right there and I
think Emily's working imagination sort
of you know taking imagination sort of
are taking us to another you know sort
of on the
yeah yeah next symposium so the answer
for me is yes I've always thought about
animals and I began like when I was very
young girl in college thinking a reading
like JJ Gibson and being interested in
how it stay a hunting spider would track
its prey over its eight eyes and being
interested that horses would see things
that you know and so actually looking at
the perceptual systems of animals but
today I'm much more involved in just you
know in understanding the animal enough
to know what it needs to know what it
requires to and I could have shown many
many more images of animals that inhabit
my sight but it's something I always
think about and I always create food and
habitat and and links to the environment
and they always so far I've been very
lucky well you know I mean it's
something I really care about and
because as their territory is constantly
being diminished its it's always one of
my subtext I've never asked to do it but
I always do it there's always food and
habitat within every project I do okay
let's see
yep go ahead and then Monique and hello
as I'm listening I have a few questions
I'm wondering about this idea of nature
because I think everyone um you know
sort of used this word and I'm wondering
it's something that might be a Western
invention I think kind of like still
when I think of nature I still think of
this separation of the environment and
people and I'm thinking about this
intergenerational aesthetics and I'm
thinking about indigenous knowledge and
this idea of the
seven generations and I'm wondering how
much of that was an influence in your
sort of journey along this idea and I'm
also kind of wondering about indigenous
knowledge and their role and how
important their sort of understanding in
relationship to the land that they live
on it's going to be a you know sort of
in this path along environmental art and
I think I'm kind of a little worried
that there wasn't any sort of kind of
mention of them and the presentations
that anyone gave and I think that
they're sort of lack of visibility was
sort of made me uncomfortable and I may
think there's a lot of different
indigenous artists that are working with
these things and I'm sort of thinking
about that and addressing those issues
when it comes to that and I'm also
thinking about I'm wondering about your
interest in empathy as a way to achieve
transformation or progress or whatever
word or idea that you want because I
think it's important that through
empathy or through sort of the way that
we feel about what's happening to the
land and to the planet that maybe we can
achieve a greater sense of care and I
think what you said about interspecies
aesthetics it's interesting to me
because I think you know privilege in
the human perspective is I think one
that achieves problems and until we can
understand that that tree that we're
creating art with is our partner or our
someone that we're collaborating with or
our brother or a sister I don't think we
can truly achieve real you know union
with the land or the environment until
we look at it as something that is a
person to us
so anybody care to well I'll be glad to
answer that one because actually my
first love was all kinds of indigenous
art beginning with little Eskimo
carvings you know walrus stuffs and
things like that in the Brooklyn Museum
that was the first thing that engaged me
on school trips when I was you know 6
years old and it's it's been an ongoing
concern of mine and I've worked very
closely with Oren Lyons and people like
that it's something I really care about
and if you're interested I'll give you
an article I presented in Sweden that
talks about my relation to different
indigenous ideas it was very important
to me for example when I did the project
in San Francisco because I worked very
closely with some local tribes then and
what they told me that I don't think has
ever been published if the disappearance
of the shellfish in San Francisco Bay
was precipitated when the US government
took it over and and said you can no
longer harvest the shellfish and what
happened was all of the oysters and and
bivalves died because the bay mud
covered them over and they suffocated
and so there's a kind of indigenous
wisdom from having worked with their
local environment for so many years that
we don't have as you know public
agencies and now and the long view as
you said because they've been there for
such a long time they're not designers
coming in and designing something
without a very thorough knowledge of the
cycles and the long term plan long term
history do you have anything to add
you're on eccentric yeah absolutely I
mention Tom here but I also talked on
here so yeah absolutely but I think I'm
always in the work I've done the precept
I step back a little bit from pretty
strong holistic ideas which almost want
to argue for kind of oneness
sometimes almost obliterated individuals
- translation stations
well I
okay the wider you know calling
something your sister or brother and
maybe doesn't matter as long as you
respect it but I don't think it
necessarily makes it something that is
but it doesn't erase the difference
thank you okay thanks for a wonderful
panel and many you mentioned the cherry
blossoms that Yuriko talks about in the
context of the immediacy of aesthetic
experience
Yuriko discussing the cherry blossoms
talks also about the context of the
celebration of the Evanescence of the
cherry blossoms and in particular in
light of the kamikaze pilots modeling
their actions on the on that celebration
of Evanescence that race is filming the
question about where the norms come from
of your intergenerational aesthetics
especially when you have these instances
where various sensory immediacy in
various contexts can have acquired
negative earth different fragrances
negative and positive and since I'm not
you were also talking about normative
criteria and enriching experiences
versus harmful experiences I was just
wondering and I know it's a fairly broad
questions where you see the norms as
coming from and how you see the norms as
grounded the grounding of the of the
norms that your environmental aesthetics
subscribe to and how you go about
negotiating these tensions between the
harmful or the negative and the positive
or the enriching do do you want to think
about it or do you want a response I'm
not really clear about the point of the
question it seems to me that this
relates also to the previous question
that nature is not named daintree is not
out there nature is in relation to two
we can't know anything that's beyond
humans scope and and so values that we
the normative standards have to do with
the well-being of humans in the
well-being of the human human
environment which is what we call nature
it's still difficult for me to focus on
and the point of your question but I
would say that when I was trying to talk
about aesthetics as questioning it's
critical mystics and create instead a
good criticism of natural practices in
relation to nature
practices of all sorts makes aesthetics
powerful I think a powerful analytical
and political tool mm-hmm because
because we relate what goes on in in our
relation to nature and our social
systems to how it affects apartment our
perception how it affects our
sensibility how it affects the qualities
of our lives and that's that's a
normative standard of the most
fundamental sort and I just want to add
one thing I think it relates more than
the previous question but it was the
question of empathy and no I don't think
we can really know what goes on in those
inner lives but what we can do is is
draw parallels so for example if you see
the wounded animal if you see a mother
defending her chicks I mean that we we
understand that we understand that as
human beings if we're mother we
understand those issues and so that is
another reason why it's very important
for me to put these animals out there
and and let people see
it's happening to them because they can
relate to them on that kind of level big
as a moderator I'm not supposed to
interject but because you mentioned my
discussion of cherry blossoms just
briefly follow up on Arnold's point that
cherry blossoms in in Japan is really
really potent aesthetics for better or
worse because we have a long sort of a
history of aesthetics of finding a
beauty in that ephemeral beauty because
a cherry blossom is blossom and then two
or three days later falls to the ground
but they don't go you know they go like
this so it's very elegant okay so we
have this long history now the sort of
the political politically problematic
use of that power of the yesterday has
to do with kamikaze pilot there was this
a real military utilization of that
symbolism and the aesthetics as the
power of aesthetic to aestheticized the
beauty arrogant beauty of the folding
soldiers literally and there are all
these other sort of a symbolisms the
items which in related to cherry
blossoms so that's one on the other hand
when tsunami hit my 2011 so we just
tomorrow is the fifth year anniversary
and Suzanne binoculars from my good
friend we watch this movie called which
was made right after that called tsunami
and cherry blossoms and they're because
right after that huge you know disaster
hit cherry blossoms started blossoming
because is that's the sort of eternal
cycle right although there's a huge
destruction and there was a film about
interviewing people about their
experience and so many of them really
refer to cherry blossoms
and its vitality regardless of what
happened and to sort of derive strength
to move you know I keep moving so so
it's it becomes really complicated that
the cherry blossoms in Japan is very
very powerful through aesthetics but it
can be used in a very pragmatic way as
are not mentioned or it can be a source
of strength so I'm not really answering
your question but just giving you a sort
of context sorry I'm gonna shut up Paul
did you have this was for Emily
about intergenerational tea Arnold's
previous remark about immediacy as a
characteristic of aesthetic experience
also helps me pick the question and the
question is how you conceive of the
different kinds of integer generality
that you refer to as being connected or
potentially connected in particular what
I have in mind is this much of the talk
you were and in your examples
cite an example of Muir in Yosemite and
Tyrell and of Smithson you're focusing
on the way in which certain kinds of
works of nature or human beings can put
the individual in touch with longer a
and natural processes that extend way
beyond the lifetime of the individual or
that's what though some of those things
would seem most immediately farce
immediacy is always a slippery in
relative term to put the individual in
touch with and not necessarily and
directly to put the image
in touch with future generations which
seems to be or for that matter past
generations which seems to be built into
the meaning of your term so I'm
wondering if you have thoughts about how
if there is such a connection and if
that connection is acceptable connection
or causal connection or how that works I
hope I understand the question correctly
thank you
well I suppose I would then maybe again
sort of mention this paper I've written
which which is called aesthetics ethics
and climate change where some some of
these ideas are are discussed and there
I do talk about imagination a little
imagination so the kind of idea amply
ative imagination which might amplify
say you say you see a u-shaped valley
okay and ampliative imagination might
enable you in an aesthetic experience to
imagine the the glacial erosion that
created that valley and so you're making
a link through imaginations to the
immediate sensory qualities to some kind
of historical geological process
well the question is who was
specifically about intergenerationally
of that example it seems to me puts you
in touch with the past perhaps well I
think about how those processes would
continue in the future but specifically
how does put you in touch with other
that simply being people okay and their
potential aesthetic response yeah okay
yeah and there again that in that paper
of what I do talk about is future
generations and I talk about questions
like I meant which I mentioned earlier
what how might we think about our
present actions of what effects they are
having on they might have on the
aesthetic experiences of future
generations of a particular place so if
we know that that place is changing due
to climate change what are some of the
kinds of aesthetic changes that we might
be able to predict actually because we
can make aesthetic predictions we can we
make aesthetic predictions all the time
when we do a gardening for example or
when we do when we do the logical
restoration we make predictions about
what the aesthetic properties might be
in in that future place a year from now
ten years from now or further on
so I suppose they're you know my my
just threw out an example what what
about my my present experience I spent
my family's in Florida living in Florida
at the moment so I spend time you know
in Florida environments which are
incredibly bio diverse but she fight
child development and I know that a lot
of these places are gonna be gone
underwater in 50 years you know
developers deny that and so you know
take that case I'm standing you know on
a Bay and I'm enjoying bird life
enjoying you know all these static
qualities and then imagining you know
really and this kind of gets
too many question about norms but not
very good answer they're kind of tragic
beauty perhaps of that these Bert will
talk about an example like that to talk
about massive extinctions the already
taking place due to climate change
so that's maybe an example putting us in
touch with what the future aesthetic
judgment or experience of someone yeah
uh yes don't thanks things in this that
causes the mind to explode with
possibilities but possible thoughts but
it seemed to me that one of the things
of the aesthetics is aesthetic
experience about is the way in which
experience feels the way I mean overall
experience and I like the notion that
Emily brought up of levels it seems like
we're talking about when you talk about
ethics we might be talking about another
level of analysis so it could be a
conceptual one it could be ecological
sometimes we go from the ecological to
the ethical you know and then relate the
two but it seems to be your notion of
hutchinson of unity in variety if we
think of these levels if we go to a your
echoes golf course right which is a baby
absolutely beautiful or may have been
beautiful at one time by but by today's
norms that are developing is worrisome
so so if we think about say a beautiful
golf course but we're and we think about
the level moving up to that level the
the unity of those two considerations
fractures the aesthetic experience it
causes us to question it in a way that
is part of the norms right it's because
we care about that
it begins to cause our experience of the
first to change and so I may be to put
the kind of example of this to bring
Patricia in in this is can you design a
aesthetically coherent and involving
this larger level of ethics say a golf
course I just think your point is so
great I mean is it is it beautiful if
it's detrimental and if we know that a
lot of people don't know that and that's
where environmental education comes in
if you tell people what the consequences
of this beauty are and then they may no
longer consider it beautiful and I think
your point is fabulous I really do
Laurine
um I just want to bring in kind of
referring back to the question again of
norms and normative experience I feel
like as an artist anyway it's time for
us to fix things
you know it's an aesthetic experience
that's just nice you know that even if
it you know influences or affects my
imagination great but I feel like our
priorities have to be a little different
and more intense so for example when you
show the the Smithson of course people
should know about Smithson and and
there's nothing harmful about that but
it's a little problematic and in the
sense that it's it's so idealized you
know it it somewhat well I don't really
feel this about this piece but like some
of the walter de maria pieces like the
Lightning field I feel like that is just
gilding the lily
please you know but somebody like like
the like the road and Prater
you know like I feel like that work is
so extremely male and and so expresses
the kind of dominance over nature that I
would like to see you when you show that
I would just advocate critique you know
don't just show that as like here's a
beautiful experience that we can have
because you know I think we're beyond
that we're so far beyond that you know
and at the same time we're dealing with
with people who don't want to admit like
you said the developers you know people
who don't want to admit what's going on
so we are in a position we have to try
and fix things you know or at least
offer a critique of what's out there
rather than saying this is you know good
for the imagination well if I can
respond to that then the philosophers in
the room
just like all going oh I mean that yeah
and my students ask me all I teach
environmental ethics and my students ask
me all the time well but but I don't I
don't I don't teach it as an advocate
because I don't for me in in the in an
educational context I think that's my
role but I'll say and I'm sure that
Arnold and Patricia have they have
response to say it - yeah I mean I I'm a
shameful lover a particular of Robert
Smithson's work I don't I say shameful
lover I maybe I don't know I just think
it's I just love his work and you know
when I did when I chose these three art
practices I would recognize that
actually a lot of the talk was pretty
gendered toward men and I try not to do
that in other work and to play my
teaching as well but okay it was there I
have written critically about artists in
particular in relation to use of animals
in art so I you know I
yeah I I take your point absolutely but
I also as a philosopher and if someone
is interested in those precious
aesthetic moments I think we have to
stand back I don't I don't want I don't
want aesthetics to be politicized all
the time it's just not that's my that's
my standpoint but I'm very aware of
ethical issues I just don't always put
them to the fore yeah I actually want to
respond to that too because I was a good
friend dismiss and and it really goes to
gender issues because I actually build
Cyrus field it's a mirror that the
Spiral Jetty was created and knew all of
those male earthwork artists and they
were the only ones Art Forum was
publishing mm-hmm and so there were a
whole group of female artists doing very
sensitive ethical projects in
but you know and by the way you know
they all came and saw our projects but
you couldn't get any traction then and
so I think you just have to think about
its past history you know it's a fact of
history that's what that's what was
important at the time and it was you
know and we weren't but if you think
about cycles something else can come to
the fore and it's certainly doing that
now I know which is like dad I actually
would like to shift this and the
previous question to a different frame
temporality and end and normativity and
intergeneration ality I would like to
shift it to well we could call it urban
change the human world is not just in
relation to nature is in relation to the
rule that we construct for ourselves the
you can see the built environment and
much of what is done is done without
both appreciation appreciation
recognition of values of the past and
end of the future I'm thinking of them
I'm involved at moment in my little
village in Maine where we have a
historic village of wood which has many
old houses in buildings and and narrow
streets and the city where the town
fathers went to widen the Main Street
which is the iconic street of the
village and there's a whole movement
trying to stop them and it's it's a very
ugly political situation but what's in
that at stake is valuing the character
of preserving the character of the
village for future generations
so people will know what a village like
this was like and recognize its special
beauty so there's a whole domain of this
issue having to do with the changes and
and and values in the human built
environment so I just wanted to be sure
that right thing that wasn't included in
this consideration right okay let's see
and thank you I really enjoyed this
panel so much all of you thanks so much
I have a very particular question for
Patricia I want to go back to the
Petaluma reservoir you said something
very interesting about the relationship
between the form the the maus form and
the function if I understood you
correctly you said people think of the
mouse as a kind of add-on later once
I've gotten the function set but in fact
it grew organically out of the function
so I just want to hear more about that I
thought that was very interesting I
didn't it wasn't apparent to me and what
you said how that actually worked okay
so actually I was on the value
engineering team and if you know what a
value engineering team is you discuss
alternatives and the consequences of
okay so you you basically look at
different alternatives and we looked at
seven alternatives I was the odd person
on the panel everybody else was an
engineer I was an artist we did seven
alternatives all six were mechanical one
was a wetland system it required a lot
of courage on the part of the the people
of Petaluma to select an artist design
over the six engineering designs but
they did and the reason they did is the
way I designed it is it was very
energy-efficient the water all flows by
gravity downhill through the mouse and
it's only pumped up once and it goes up
toward the highway and it goes into UV
disinfection and then if you look at
that aerial view of the mouse you can
see there's a beautiful little swimming
pool like of water that's our recycled
water during the drought in
California we've been producing recycle
all of the Seward water is transformed
into recycled water and it goes on
agriculture tucum certified organic
crops and if you look out on the hills
the only green hills are where they have
our recycled water and so the city is
actually I work with economic
development as well and the way I
convinced them to do my project was the
water all flows by gravity so it's very
energy-efficient it was cheaper to build
it was cheaper to maintain and it's in
an earthquake zone so if those berms
break the water will just flow back down
into the Petaluma River and I also
pointed out that the people would be
getting a park that instead of something
with a chain-link fence around it they
would have I think it's more than 300
acres and four miles of trails that they
could access it was very inexpensive to
build because everything is on the same
footprint so all of the trails are the
berms I don't know if you know what a
berm is it's a kind of elevated earthen
embankment
that's what contains the pond water but
those are also the truck access routes
maintenance routes and those are also
also the public trails the wildlife
habitat is all created around the image
of the mouse and within the islands in
the center and so it's a very kind of
homogeneous project and the engineers in
the end they started out being very
skeptical but what happened was we got I
I actually presented my project along
with the other six engineering projects
and they voted for mine because the
Audubon Society came
all of the local environmental groups
came out because they wanted the habitat
they wanted the trails they wanted the
park and they didn't want something with
a fence around it and so that was that
was really the story they voted to build
it and of course I have an artist but I
have to go down to the Army Corps of
Engineers I have to go to US Fish and
Wildlife I have to explain my projects
why they work why they're important and
what happened was I then you have to get
the money these are not like simple
straight line things we invited the head
of the California coastal Conservancy to
come over now we need we got the vote we
needed money and I showed him the
project and I described all of the land
that people could have and he said to me
how much do you need and whenever I hear
that I know that the project is going to
go and he gave us 2.5 million dollars
which was matched by open space the open
space district and that's how it got
built and now it's been making money for
the city everybody loves it and they're
tourists all kinds of place but it is a
sewage treatment facility that is what
it is but there's so much wildlife there
that that's what people really come to
see and then and then jog on the trails
ok yes
I was reading this interview this week
to the Dutch designer Martin bass who is
this a master aesthetic for me with the
smoke collection and anyway he was
saying that the greener thing you can do
is not design at all anymore and I
wonder if you never consider a new form
of aesthetic where maybe it's about
emptiness it's about no no a new
approach to design where there's no
design is just the Conservancy of what
nature can be and the art that can come
from nature as as you explain for us
well you know what as a designer it
depends on what you want to get out of
the project for example in the
Netherlands now I work with engineers
actually a man who founded the whole
environmental engineering program at
Delft Technical University of Delft and
I've done work there so you probably
know about their room for the river
project you know but if you want public
access if you want an aesthetic
experience then there needs to be some
design that's coordinated with
functional things that you want to
happen yeah
yeah but I you know I think there can't
be just no design it has to be some
design but it can be very stepped in
basically my earlier projects you'll see
it with much more like sculpture because
that's what I was hired to do was
produces a piece of sculpture and so
that whole visioning of Fair Park they
did not ask me to design a municipal to
a basin I designed it as a municipal
flood medicine but that wasn't what I
was asked to do I was asked to provide
sculpture and so all the other programs
I have my own agenda which is the
wildlife it's the public
it's the you know the park and then now
I'm asked to do infrastructure and I
still keep layering all these things on
because it's important to me but that's
not what I'm asked to do okay it's 11
o'clock but because we started late I
can take one more question yes good I'm
sorry to speak again but I I didn't want
to go back to Paul gyres question about
instances of looking backwards in terms
of as the aesthetic concerns of past
generations and looking forward and it
occurs to me that you know you opened
with the idea I think that aesthetics is
a field that is you know beyond
traditional disciplines of art history
or art and I would look at our key ology
and archaeologists I would look at
experimental or experiential archaeology
that's happening and how much time
people spend thinking about the
aesthetic tastes of people of the past
as they're recreating technologies and
processes of the past and I think that
our consideration of past human
aesthetics and future humans aesthetics
is actually with us all the time and we
may not always think of it in that way I
mean I think of reenactment groups you
know the Civil War Reenactment groups
where we were so concerned with really
the finest details of aesthetics in
their recreations and the film Lincoln
that was so praised for the way the
imaginative way that people tried to
think back to the aesthetics of the mid
nineteenth century an Arthur's example
of his village where the main street is
something you're thinking about in terms
of an aesthetics of a past village
population and then in examples of the
future I would urge us all to think of
that overused
example of the Voyager Golden Record
trying to create an object that's going
to go out into space golden disks with
images on them and trying to imagine
what the aesthetic reception is of non
not even a what is human but something
in the future and I would any artist who
really is concerned for legacy I would
think would I'm not an artist but I
would think that it would be important
if you care about what future people are
going to think of your work that you
would try to project into the aesthetic
NORs and considerations of future
generations and I think Patricia you in
a sense implied a lot of that with the
talk of where your work would eventually
what your work would eventually become I
just want to say one thing we can never
know and the kind of proof of that is if
you look in museums there are many
objects and museums that were never
considered art at the time they were
made they were considered you know just
a cooking vessel or you know something
like that something very utilitarian
that would never be thought of as a work
of art and yet our judgment is that
I think that particular issue will be
pursued in the afternoon session yes
there so that would be a good segue to
that I think we are going to close this
session and I want to thank the three
speakers for the wonderful presentations
we'll take 50 minute break and then
we'll convene again
