Jen ran the first half I'm the second
half my name is Patty Phillips I'm Dean
of Graduate Studies and I want to
welcome you back if you were here with
us at 1:00 or welcome you for the first
time if you're just coming in
midway through the symposium and welcome
to our very autumn-like Metcalf
auditorium I always have to keep a scarf
on but it's it's very appropriately
fall-like in here so again just a
reminder that this is a the symposium
has emanated and and sort of developed
out of a course called publications that
generally sentire co-teaching and
actually it's the first time that Jen
and I have kotico taught although I feel
like it's something we've been doing for
a very long time so I'm really enjoying
working with you in this way and we also
have like 15 or 16 really wonderful
really remarkable students in the class
will primarily graduate students but we
have a student we also have a student
from brown we have an undergraduate so
we're really very quickly forming I
think a very vibrant community of
writers and editors and really taking a
hold in a very intentional way this
challenge of what is a publication and
trying to be very bold and open-minded
and as we think about what we are going
to create and produce together by the
end of the spring so it's been a really
fun trip so far and I think it's going
to get even more exciting as time goes
on so we're very happy to have the next
panel of artists and designers who write
who infuse and somehow integrate ideas
of writing and a writing practice and in
conjunction with other creative
practices so it's my pleasure to just
very we have you have the introductions
in the program but just to briefly
introduce John Miller who is a an artist
and a writer and a musician and the book
the ruin of exchange is a compliation of
20 years of his essays monographs
theoretical texts and artist statements
and john is a graduate of RISD in fact
all of our panelists have some
connection to RISD that was just kind of
by chance it wasn't intentional but John
welcome oh and I will let just say one
thing I'm sorry we're good but we're
gonna just do the same format that we
did with the first three panelists well
they'll each speak for and then we'll
have an opportunity for all of you to
ask questions to our three guests here
presenters but it's a certain point Jen
and I are just going to open it up and
just we'll invite all the presenters to
maybe just sit on the edge of the stage
and just we can just keep keep them
continue the conversation and maybe you
also also answer you know have more
general questions that maybe span this
whole question between writing and
editing okay
so John thank you
I'm glad to be here and to have the
opportunity to talk about writing from
the standpoint of being an artist
the first criticism I wrote was
published in the RISD Press in 1977 I
co-wrote a text called contradictions in
the politics of art and then my ace the
second thing I published was also in the
original press and it was a review of
Jenny Holzer's work am I too far away
from the mic and everybody hear me okay
and Jenny Holzer was a grad student
while I was here as an undergrad and she
and I was working in video at the time
she was in the painting department but
more it more interested in doing video
and and working in a kind of more
conceptualist vein and she graduated in
76 went to New York went to the Whitney
program we remained in touch she urged
me to apply for the Whitney program to
which I did and the well a couple things
came out of that one by working in video
I kind of started out being interested
in sort of a narrative video and there
was even a term narrative art at the
time and I was very much influenced by
John Baldessari
who I'd worked with briefly at CalArts
and William Wegman but gradually I
started moving toward a more kind of
cinematic model even though at the time
the discourse around film and video was
the video was absolutely seen as
absolutely other to film people don't
think that way anymore but moving to the
more cinematic model
suggested writing or it demanded writing
like some scripting and some planning
and then at the same time Jenny had
started working in a kind of artist book
format although there wasn't so much
writing involved what she was doing at
the time was going through different
kinds of text books and redrawing
diagrams and looking for structural
similarities so there might be a
sociology diagram and a biology diagram
that looked very much the same but that
we're astray ting much different
concepts and and part of what she was
getting at was a kind of use of graphic
or spatial metaphors to organize
abstract thought but anyway she had kind
of introduced me to the whole prospect
of doing artists books and the first
thing I did after I got out of school or
got out of RISD and went to the Whitney
program was to do an artist book called
cinematic moments that were was a series
of short epiphanies and just sort of
paragraph long things but it entailed
writing and it was in some ways linked
to a cinematic model I suppose the idea
being that if you relived an experience
or felt like a kind of sense of deja vu
it was almost like picturing yourself in
a scenario or something like that
so there was some sense of like already
having been seen or already having been
experienced that I was getting after in
this short book but anyway these things
sort of drove me towards writing so I
always considered writing in that sense
to be part of an artistic practice not
something separate although I would go
on to
you know published kind of conventional
reviews and things like that another
thing that was in the air at the time
was the work of art and language who
many regard is the first conceptual
artists and one of the things that art
and language did was to claim critical
texts or basically criticism as art
works so to kind of collapse the
difference and I felt that that was true
but basically there was also a gesture
to that that artist after art and
language could also declare their
critical text to be artworks and that's
all well and good but it wouldn't have
the same impact as like the first time
when art and language did it but I I
took that also to be true that criticism
can interpenetrate an artistic practice
and and and what I'm most interested in
our artistic practices that are critical
so to give some sense of that I'm going
to show a PowerPoint and and not speak
and the PowerPoint is a piece in itself
so in other words the PowerPoint isn't
illustrating an artwork the artwork is a
PowerPoint it's an approach that I took
from someone who studied with me at
Columbia of a woman in Kirov Benedetto
who's an artist but also a poet and so
her work is very much rooted in writing
and there's been some kind of back and
forth between us the PowerPoint that she
did took the form as a kind of personal
ad and there's like a whole strain of my
work where I've used personal ads as
artistic material but anyway I'll just
play this and it'll I guess my hope is
that it'll put you inside the writing
and give you a sense of it instead of me
simply describing it to you
ah I guess one other thing too like in
working in in video I suppose another
kind of right early model for me was
like the work of jean-luc Godard whose
films were always a kind of form of
criticism and also particularly with
this piece Chris Marker
how am i doing timewise
um yeah I was I was going to check at
the beginning and that I didn't yeah I
can just go for five or ten more minutes
I'll just say a couple things about this
so for this well it wasn't so much like
a program when I set up but what when I
was interested in doing was to try and
put together a kind of set of critical
propositions in simple language and and
to combine sort of different orders of
writing or different sources so you know
part of its biographical part of it is a
form of criticism and part of it is also
I suppose a bit of a parody or something
but I wanted to I wanted to put like a
kind of hybrid form together in this
piece and I wanted to use the PowerPoint
because of looking at it as a kind of
already slightly dated and degraded form
rather than doing what a lot of video
artists do now which is to try to
produce like a spectacular super
high-res video where often like the
production values are trotted out as a
kind of guarantee of legitimation so I
really wanted it to rest more in the
writing and yeah that's what I that's
what I was after with this and I think
the other thing I wanted to say was just
how I got started as a as a critic like
after hour after I got out of RISD there
was a long time when I I didn't write
and then it was at the urging of my
partner or Rosenberg who's also an
artist she was saying like you know you
should really write you should really
publish what you
thinking about all the stuff all the
time so this was during the the kind of
period of the East Village art scene in
the 80s so I sent a review blindly to
the East Village I a paper that's not
around anymore and it was edited by
Carla McCormack and Walter Robinson and
then the stuff I sent in ran full page
they I didn't get paid a penny but it
ran prominently and then I started
thinking oh I should be a little more
kind of systematic about this so I asked
David Robbins who I knew had published
texts in a number of places for advice
and he said send your stuff to art
scribe they've been really good to work
with and art scribe was a magazine that
was kind of re formatted by Matthew
Collings in London in the 1980s it was a
forerunner for Freese so I had written
something about Ellen McCullum's work
and I sent it in and from what I heard
Matthew Collins read the first paragraph
and put it in the wastebasket and then
the assistant editor who edited the back
of the magazine the reviews Ian Bruns
Gil fished it out of the wastebasket and
read it all the way through and said you
know Matthew I think you should have
another look at this text and it ended
up running and then about a month later
they asked me to become the contributing
or the u.s. editor for art scribes so I
kind of went from the wastebasket to
editor and a very short time but also
for me it was a learning experience
because actually based on the graphic
design of the magazine I always imagined
magazines to be these kind of powerful
entities like looking at them from the
outside and you know later learned that
most are kind of labors of love or at
least were then and I'll tell one more
story and then I'll finish but to keep
our describe was was operating on a
shoestring and one of the things that
Matthew Collingswood wanted to do with
the magazine this was before the why be
a boom in in London so British artists
were really working in obscurity and I
visited the art scribe offices once and
it was just routine I and I did a bunch
of studio visits while I was in London
and there would I would meet with
artists who hadn't had a show in eight
or nine years and who were working very
hard and didn't have a show on the
horizon you know so it was much
different than New York in the 80s and
Matt Collins was trying to address that
not by complaining that the British
artists were victims of injustice his
idea was to create a kind of forum and
then put articles about British artists
alongside articles about American and
German artists and to kind of just
insert them into the discourse which I
think was a smart way to go but at one
point he needed funding for the magazine
so he contacted a woman named Patricia
Butler who was from Texas who was
married to an Exxon executive and I
think Matt's fantasy was that she would
stay in Texas and he'd have free rein to
do whatever he wanted with the magazine
but she immediately bought a townhouse
in London and was in the office all the
time and issuing these edicts like you
couldn't mention politics and a review
or text unless it was there in the work
somehow
or banning the use of the word entropy
and into it was kind of crazy there had
been well there had been like some kind
of terrorist action in London where a
neighbor of hers had his fingers cut off
and she was very scared and one time as
a result of that and the arts crafts
offices were in this kind of industrial
section on the margins of London and
there was one time Matt Collins came
into the office have found Patricia
Butler hiding under a table because
she'd seen a black man walking down the
hallway so to give you an idea of like
the chaos and craziness that can lie
underneath the surface of a of a
magazine eventually she fired Matt
Collings
because she she had a she her Ally was
the production manager a guy who
vacationed who liked a vacation and
still apartheid South Africa and who was
very much aligned with those politics
and something came up we're not
colleagues punched him in the mouth and
then he was like thrown out of art
scribe the next day anyway
and on that note
John thank you that actually brought
back a lot of memories that set that
padre Park City site and new urban
landscape and all the other things that
were happening there in the late 80s
into the 90s so thank you so much yeah
that was great
our next speaker is Marissa Olsen and
Marissa is an artist and writer and new
media theorist and an anthology of her
critical writings from the past ten
years is forthcoming published by link
editions and Marissa has been a visiting
faculty member in the digital plus media
program here at RISD thank you well like
everyone else I just want to say would
say I'm okay thank you um I just want to
say this is Jenna steps up now I just
want to say thank you so much for having
me here and this has been really a great
program already um I'm gonna do a kind
of collage of things starting with just
quickly scrolling through my always in
need of updating website just to give
you a sense of how interdisciplinary my
work is um so yeah Marissa Wilson comm
if you want to look at it later
um I told Jen before this panel that
even though I've given plenty of artist
talks before I've never spoken about my
writing which is ironic because writing
I'm realizing today is the way that I
started making art so I think I might
actually talk a bit about writing and a
bit about writing and
and go back and forth and then they'll
probably run out of time so let me say
that the way that I started writing a
czar was that I was raised by a
cryptographer father who was always full
of crazy puns one time when I was a kid
I asked him why can't you say anything
normal but he was fluent in nine
languages which is just insane to me and
so language was like a subject in my
house all the time also a subject in my
house was computers we had a computer
you know well before the Internet and I
grew up making essentially what now is
often referred to as ASCII art just
programming things on the Commodore 64
making banners and things like that that
I didn't really know where art but now I
really wish I still had and so and oddly
enough randomly I happen to be distantly
related to Claude Monet so at that at
the time that I was doing that work work
I was like art is this thing you know
that this capital a art and it's
primarily painting and I always felt
like I wanted to be an artist but
couldn't paint and so therefore couldn't
be an artist and so I came in through
the back door I guess starting out as a
lyricist and a musician I also did a
project I can show you the cover of the
book this is called poems I wrote while
listening to the doors 1992 to 1994
before I found the Internet this happens
to be a book of my high school poetry
and when I did this book I launched it
in an event at a space in New York
called light industry where I had real
poets kind of perform a poetry reading
and so I had poets read my poems or
whatever I guess part of what was
interesting to me about it was you know
this question of like what is goodness
or what is talent like we automatically
think bad poetry when we hear high
school poetry but these were my first
really creative efforts and I can tell
you it was very surreal to hear poets
that I really really admired reading
them out loud like in front of Hulme
other humans so meanwhile I've also done
a lot of writing and editing as a real
writer and guess you could say writing
for a lot of art publications but also
some mainstream publications like I was
writing about art for Wired living in
San Francisco during the first calm era
which is an interesting thing to have
sort of survived and I used to edit the
journal camerawork when I was associate
director of SF camerawork I found it a
zine at SF MoMA called smack that was
really a kind of auxilary to their
exhibitions interestingly new media at
SF MoMA didn't have budgets for openings
it was just sort of like this side thing
and so we used to this the group that
was associated with the zine we would
like launch the scenes at the Museum
kind of unofficially in order to get
people to show up and perform that act
of having an opening for an exhibition
and so for me I was thinking about it as
I was listening to everyone so far today
I think there's always been this kind of
fluidity between
and I also curate exhibitions so this
kind of fluidity between like wanting to
engage with artists writing artists work
and even a similarity in a certain sense
to making installations for me I can
just show you really quickly some images
of my sculptural and installation work I
should say I had a solo show opening
last night of some of this work and then
was up late and got up at 6 a.m. to come
here from New York so yeah I hope I'm
not being articulate
I can't even articulate that somehow
about anyway so I make a lot of
sculptural work that is about the
cultural history of Technology and often
times in my artists talks I will say
that I'm really just sort of making
centerpieces and whether I'm making a
performance or a video or a text or
something else it's really just about
putting something to plop down on the
table to bring people to the table to
have a conversation around and
conversation for me is the most
interesting part of being an artist I'm
not ever really interested in kind of
error bombing an exhibition into a
museum and just kind of backing into the
hedges it's really more about having an
excuse to talk to people I was going to
just briefly mention this project that I
did that was I did it in 2004 I put
myself in training tradition for
American Idol and kept three months
three months of a diary on a blog the my
funny anecdote that I like to tell about
this now was that I was hearing about
these newfangled blog things a lot and
2004
and so I was like I think that this
would be you know that an interest I was
very very interested in Dyer istic forms
and actually I had written my
undergraduate thesis and the rhetoric
department at Berkeley on had the cheesy
title the semiotic of digital
storytelling but it was about people
kind of pre blog writing autobiographies
and the kind of narratology of
autobiographies when they were using
digital media so anyway my anecdote
about this is that a new media artist
friend of mine who's now pretty
well-known had just Cory Arcangel had
just stayed with me in San Francisco for
the show that I curated and so I called
him my phone like how do I start a blog
and he's like I don't know but I have
this friend Jonah Peretti call him and
ask him so if you don't recognize the
name Jonah found it he co-founded
Huffington Post and he's now the CEO of
BuzzFeed a fairly popular website and I
called Jonah and I said how do I start a
blog and he's like I don't know but my
sister chelsea peretti is as unknown
comedian and a lot of her friends have
blogs and i think they use WordPress so
I did a yahoo search for because this is
before Google being a verb for WordPress
and found this website and started a
blog funny thing about this was that it
was American Idol was the number one
search term on the Internet at the time
and my site came up number one in their
site came up number three somehow and so
I was getting like 20,000 hits a day
from people searching for words that I
started to see the blog with like
Britney Spears
and I started talking to them about
voting because it was right before the
election between Bush and Kerry and I
was hearing that my generation the the
same as the demographic for this show
wasn't showing up to vote but if they
did it might make a difference and of
course this is a show predicated on you
know texting your vote and picking your
your lead or your idol and so I started
talking about using your voice not just
to sing but politically how people vote
on what I should wear etcetera I had
like 10,000 votes on what DIY t-shirt I
should wear to my audition yadda yadda
okay so um I also wanted to play just a
short bit of this video oh that's the
wrong video uh interesting I need to fix
my website um I'm sorry bear with me
this one um so I I there's not time to
play the whole thing but I'll just play
a little bit of it I was asked to be in
an exhibition that was about the
experience of art and again harkening
back to my kind of critical theory days
I was always very interested in the
concept of a crisis or a kind of textual
or it could even be visual description
of a visual experience and always very
interested in kind of self reflexivity
and art and things that kind of
described themselves or their conditions
of production and so when I was asked to
be in the show I had this Skype with the
curators and I was like oh everything
that you're saying about this show about
the experience of art reminds me of my
favorite piece of video art that I saw
in grad school which was a piece made
show you now by Richard Serra and
collaboration with Nancy hole it's
called boomerang and I was saying I'm
always searching for it on YouTube and I
could never find it and immediately
after we hung up from the call I
searched and it had suddenly appeared on
YouTube and so it was like a sign and I
decided rather than making something new
I really just wanted to kind of recreate
this piece so let me just play a little
bit of it so you know what I'm actually
talking about this was made in 1974
incidentally which is interesting to
just keep in mind in terms of the early
era of video art oh do we have volume
we'll find out
anyway this goes on for like 10 minutes
but what's happening here is richard
serra had a residency at a TV studio in
texas and he had made some really great
video or a piece of which is here in the
RISD museum actually even though he's
people some people like don't know that
he made video art which I just find
scandalous um but anyway he sat Nancy
Holt down and she was if it's not
apparent here talking about talking and
hearing herself while listening to this
slightly time-delayed recording of
herself talking and it's the whole
process is so like phenomenologically
 up that she just can't even talk
and the title boomerang comes from this
moment later in the video where she says
my voice goes out and comes back like a
boomerang
but she's so jacked up by this kind of
out-of-body experience that she can't
pronounce the word and she says boom
boom
so anyway when I made this piece I just
posted I reposted this video and my
video as YouTube response videos to each
other almost as if there was no
beginning and end and I felt like the
most apropos way of kind of recreating
it was to watch the video on YouTube and
kind of stay back what I was hearing her
say immediately as I was saying it so it
creates some kind of stutters and myself
as well and you know when I think about
this I love so many things about this
Richard Serra video or really I think of
it as a Nancy Holt video and but one of
the things I like about it is that it it
for me kind of disproves a lot of
assumptions that I think people tend to
have about the visual versus the
literary arts or language or whatever
which is kind of nicely summed up in
this conversation between Socrates and
Phaedrus when Socrates is explaining a
crisis and I'll just read you a couple
words from that Socrates is quoted as
saying you know Phaedrus that's the
strange thing about writing which truly
makes it correspond to painting the
painters products stand before us as
though they were alive but if you
question them they maintain a most
majestic silence
it's the same with written words they
seem to talk to you as if they were
intelligent but if you ask them anything
about what they say from a desire to be
instructed they go on telling you just
the same thing forever I think it's a
really interesting thought but I totally
disagree and I totally disagree with
this kind of binarization of words and
images I think particularly you can
imagine as someone who made her first
art out of characters from a keyboard on
a Commodore 64
um how am i doing for time I didn't
check time either five minutes okay well
I was going to talk about the experience
of coining the term post-internet art
but I don't know if I was going to
actually read a text that I had written
defining post-internet art but I don't
think I can do it in five minutes but I
will just sort of say I will just
describe the experience of it so how
many people are have heard this term
post internet art it's come to be
strangely unexpectedly popular a couple
years ago I set a Google Alert for the
word and one of the first ones I got was
Kanye West saying he wanted to be the
post Internet Disney and then like more
recently I got another one from Kanye
West saying that his wedding seating
arrangement was organized according to
post internet theory which I I don't
even understand but in any case I can
tell you now I'm constantly being when I
meet people I'm always asked like what
is post internet art so I'll just sort
of briefly say that in late 2005 or
early 2006 it was early 2006 I first
mentioned this term to describe my own
work in a panel discussion at eai in New
York that was about web 2.0 and its
influence on art and it was organized by
rhizome
Rosen's executive director at the time
Lauren Cornell and I at the time had
just started a full-time job as editor
and curator of rhizome and my first
agenda as editor and curator was to come
storm in and change our mission
statement and we had started out as an
organization meant to support Internet
art but that was when it was a really
kind of with still somewhat fringe I'll
admit but more even more fringe and
ghettoized but I felt like the field had
become much more diverse at that point
and I also felt as if the internet was
now this is like such an understatement
but the internet was beginning to creep
into our everyday lives I mean I
remember when it was still uncanny to
walk down the street and hear people say
Facebook out loud like are you on
Facebook and I was like wow that's
someone talking about the Internet not
on the Internet you know but now of
course like every every restaurant door
has a Yelp sticker on it or something
like that but so I I used the term to
describe work that I was making in
particular as making this series of
drawings called monitor tracings where I
would perform a Google image search for
defunct technology pull the image up on
the screen put a piece of paper on the
screen and trace the image off and so
when you see them in a gallery they're
just drawings with the mechanical pencil
on paper but I was interested in this
idea of like how could a piece of paper
be internet art and it was work that I
couldn't have made without the Internet
and so I described it as post Internet
in the sense of kind of occurring well
there's a big misunderstanding about the
term but the misunderstanding is that
the term doing the worst job explaining
and I was so nonlinear as I mentioned I
had an opening last night
and the misunderstanding is that the
term refers to the death of the Internet
and in fact I meant to refer to art made
after the birth of the internet or at
this moment when when the internet sort
of became ubiquitous in in our lives at
least our meaning like our Western
northern hemisphere populist society
lives and so much like I'm here using a
webcam - I mean this video has never
existed in any material format it was
recorded directly and I mean unless you
wanted to bait what material means
that's another panel it was recorded
directly into a webcam for the Internet
and every time I show it in a museum I
just send them you know a link of the
piece etc and so it was also with regard
to changing reisen's
mission statement I really wanted to
talk about ways to support other artists
who were engaging with the Internet and
very self reflexive ways and whose work
was influenced by Network culture even
if it it may or may not exist online but
now somehow I woke up one day a few
years later and I didn't even like
somehow missed the moment in which it
became super popular and now I just woke
up on the day that it became like really
popular to hate the term because it's
suddenly no you know marketing term or
Kanye West is using it the way he's
using it at cetera and it's funny I was
recently a visiting artist at SAIC and
had the real honour of being interviewed
for the video data bank there which is
both an archive of video art and an
archive of video interviews with a lot
of great artists and writers and so I
spent my extra time in Chicago just kind
of taking a masterclass by sitting and
watching as many
interviews as I could the video data
bank and one of them was with Allan
Kaprow I think it was recorded in 1974
apparently a big year for me and Capra
was talking about what it was like to
coin the term happenings and it was
really quite uncanny for me to hear
someone else talk about this moment of a
word first falling out of his mouth and
then taking you know gaining legs and
some people loving it some people hating
it and he even he even like later in his
life tried to kind of change the word
and say okay now we're not talking about
happenings anymore we're talking about
activities but in fact that didn't kind
of gain the same traction or people
weren't as embracing of the term another
funny anecdote maybe we'll end with war
stories about editors or whatever was
that apparently he wrote his his first
article about about happenings which i
think was called happenings in the New
York scene for Art Forum like the day
practically the day that Jackson Pollock
didn't in the interview he says I
finally felt like thank god he's dead
now we can really do something in art
but apparently it was so scandalous in
that sense that the editor of art forum
at the time sat on the article for two
years before he felt like it was okay to
publish it which is I don't know it's
just interesting to think about the the
impact that artists writing can have or
the like the scandal or whatever um
alright I'm feel like I'm babbling now
and I'm sure I'm over time so I'll just
wait until questions but thank you
Thank You Marissa and our final speaker
is Rob
Jim Petro and Rob as a designer and
writer and he currently is the creative
lead for Google design New York and
since 2006 he's been a thesis advisor
for the MFA program graphic design here
at RISD in that same year I think you
launched lined and unlined and which is
a really traumatic sight a wonderful
sight of writings and other other works
that I urge you to go to so thanks for
being here Rob thank you I just have a
black screen I don't have any slides yes
so thanks so much to Jen and Patty can
you guys hear me okay thanks to the RISD
museum one of my favorite places I was
on the team of designers from Project
projects that created the identity and
website for the museum so it's one of my
favorite places to be and certainly to
share my work and I think what I what I
brought today were just two two samples
of work one made from the first decade
of my writing as a practice which is
basically 2003 to 2013
my first piece in 2003 was called
default systems in graphic design for
émigré magazine and in 2013 I got a
McDowell fellowship and spent three
weeks at the MacDowell Colony and so it
was a kind of a very important point for
me as a writer because I kind of went
from someone who was mostly commissioned
to do like bits and pieces here and
there to someone who was actually giving
being given some time and space to sort
of think about a writing practice and so
I think since then since 2013 I've been
thinking differently about my writing
practice versus necessarily my design
practice although I wouldn't opposed
them that strongly
I think in fact like the the practice of
running a studio and coordinating a
large team of designers which I did at
project projects and now at Google winds
up meaning that you function a lot as an
editor or as a synthesizer or as a
champion or as a referee in many various
forms and so you know as someone who's
also a creative person and perhaps an
introvert you you know writing is a
space in which to sort of withdraw on
with and reflect sometimes and so I
think I've you know always needed that
space and always you know sort of
guarded it very closely for myself and I
guess what I mean to do by having these
two two different selections for you is
to just think about how my writings
changed the first decade I guess or so
as I'm saying you know was characterized
by these like text objects which is like
something like a design brief or a
dialogue an interview or a glossary or
an email reply chain all of which were
models for writing that I did and I
think a lot of times the reason I did
that was because you know selecting the
form to begin with was very important to
me it's sort of acted as like a prop or
a structure that I could you know write
into because a lot of the times the
things I was writing about maybe I was
either less sure of or didn't know a lot
about before I began writing them and so
I wrote to found to find out I used
writing to kind of find out about things
and they were shorter than almost all of
them were were much shorter and they
were often I was often in writing
interested in writing about writing or
writing about text because I felt like
as a designer I could design the prose
and I could somehow you know actually
work with the material in in writing
that I was writing about so a lot of the
a lot of the essays from that first ten
year your period were mostly about
writing itself and the first section
I'll read is from a six-part a six-part
series of essays I did called serial
series which were done for a performer
with Dexter Sinister who published a lot
of my writing
in 2008 and it was a six-part series and
basically they gave they were publishing
a newspaper in real time so every week
during performer there would be a new or
actually a very couple days there would
be like a new newspaper that they would
give away and they had a printing office
across the street from the New York
Times it was at this moment when the New
York Times was like heavily indebted
still heavily indebted but but sort of
there was this anxiety about what is the
future of the newspaper and and is there
something we could do to sort of think
about that context so I was the only
writer that had a kind of recurring spot
of a thousand words and I felt a great
anxiety about that and a pressure to
kind of perform and so it being
performer I sort of tried to embrace
that and I think you also hear in this
in this initial selection a little bit
of acceleration ISM because I was under
such into tremendous time constraints
but as I read it back now I think a lot
about the acceleration is immersed art
of thinking about more critically at
this moment of like the acceleration of
technology and of the Internet and all
these other things that have come up and
the other talks so this is from serial
serious part one text takes time it
takes time to read it takes time to
write and it takes time to reproduce
throughout the history of text
production people have been searching
for ways to distribute the costs of
producing text financial temporal more
evenly across the system this search led
of former Goldsmith Johannes Gutenberg
to develop and refine his system of
movable type by the 1450s which
eliminated the laborious book copying
process used previously by monastic
scribes and with Gutenberg system in
place Venetian publisher Aldus Manutius
was quickly able to popularize printed
books by the late 1400s as text becomes
easier and cheaper to produce more
copies of it get made while Gutenberg's
Bible was printed in a small edition of
180 Manutius Box were printed by the
thousands more copies need more readers
and more readers like their text to be
portable while Gutenberg heavy Bible was
best read at a library table Manutius
aslam editions could be easily slipped
into a saddlebag or vest pocket you went
to Gutenberg's books but Manutius bucks
came with you as increasingly numerous
and increasingly portable cop
of texts found their way into the world
they found new readers to buy them and
they spread literacy with them in the
next 200 years
text continued to get swifter more
portable and more widely distributed
giving rise to a new form by the late
1600s or early 1700s the newspaper by
now firmly established in Europe and
North America the newspapers growth was
spurred by a flowering of global trade
access to time sensitive political news
and financial information was
increasingly important and publishers
strived to invent new technologies to
meet that demand by the early 1800s as a
result of the Industrial Revolution The
Times of London boasted a press that
could easily print a daily broad sheet
at 1,100 pages a minute with a
circulation to match by 1830 presses
could print on both sides saving paper
and the penny press was born offering a
product that cost one-sixth of the
competition's price once again more
copies cheaper copies smaller copies
meant better distribution and as a
result more readers at the caught at the
cot as the cost of mechanically
reproducing text fell the cost of
circulating printed texts fell with it
according to historian and in felt as
the fruits of the Industrial Revolution
like paved roads fast coaches canals and
eventually railways made it easier to
deliver printed text to their intended
audiences around the same time firms
that were known as booksellers had
shifted away from selling each other's
books instead reestablished themselves
as something more like the publishers
that we know today wholesaling their
books but not as Feltes points out
anybody else's this concentration of
efforts along a single product line did
the trick
after all it does no good to deliver
more printed text to readers if the
demand from those readers isn't
stimulated at the same time so some of
those some of the same fruits of
industry that cheapen the cost of
circulating text were used to drive up
demand travelling salesmen were
dispatched bearing cheap printed
prospectuses and catalogs to hakka
publishers wares to a more
geographically dispersed audience on
those same trains in fairy wears fairy
ways were newspapers streaming from the
center of cities and featuring paid
advertisements for books
increasingly the free publicity of
literary reviews books were cheaper and
even easier to print and they were
cheaper faster and easier to distribute
readers were increased increasingly
aware of new books on the market and
because of the new industrial age they
were increasingly able to find leisure
time to read them all of which set the
stage for a flourishing in the Victorian
appreciation and consumption of
literature costs fell distribution
distribution climbed demand grew but one
variable was not improving it still took
authors a long time to produce a text
and he and even given their best efforts
there was no guarantee to publishers
that an author's work would ignite the
passions of an ever-widening public
again it was the newspaper to the rescue
or rather technology developed for the
newspaper industry when a greedy and
disapproving British government levied
attacks on the newspaper industry
starting in 1712 it grew over the next
century - for pennies printers began
producing pamphlets instead through a
loophole in the new tax law pamphlets
which were larger than newspapers were
not taxed and only marginally more
expensive than newspapers to produce
while a few people could not afford the
caught the daily cost of six pennies for
a one to two page newspaper the
occasional cost of a twelfth penny or
one shilling pamphlet of 48 pages seemed
more justified printers naturally
gravitated towards pamphlets and began
filling the additional space with more
advertising fiction and miscellaneous
content some printers realized that this
new content was more popular than their
news coverage and began recruiting
proven authors to publish exclusively in
the new pamphlet format generally these
small booklets were called numbers or
serials but more specifically they
evolved into a range of forms including
the part issue the three-volume the
bimonthly and the magazine serial
effectively the serial unbound the
singular book reformulating it into a
series of installments in doing so it
instantly appealed to publishers and
booksellers by lowering risk if an
author's work did not appeal to the
public at least publishers had not put
all their eggs in one basket but the
cereal also increased demand not only
was the cereal more reasonably priced
the newspapers but it was far less
expensive than books
the cereal was a book on an installment
plan they were wildly collectible and
more portable - best of all the cereal
kept a writer in the public eye for
months even years at a time as a cereal
suspense built chapter by chapter now
the time it took an author to compose a
text was not a liability but an asset
Charles Dickens was an author who proved
himself in the newspaper trade starting
in 1833 with his first story a dinner at
poplar Walk his short essays or sketches
of daily life had proven popular with
the general public
Dickens his first novel The Pickwick
Papers debuted as a part issue in 1836
around the same time the House of
Commons voted to raise the tax on
newspapers by another penny with this
final regulatory regulatory barrier
minimized the elements needed for a
vigorous mass media were in place it was
time for a runaway hit Dickens delivered
the first part issue of The Pickwick
Papers sold a modest edition of a
thousand but with the introduction of
chapter 10 of Sam Weller
mr. Pickwick's servant demand exploded
working-class Londoners couldn't get
enough of Sam's cockney wit and wisdom
by the end of the serial Dickens a
circulation had expanded forty fold the
author was a bonafide literary star and
the Victorian appetite for novels and
numbers was raging so I think you can
get a sense from that text of just sort
of the it's interesting text itself and
out text is produced and how technology
influences text but it's also I think
you know and each of these is written
like a serial and that it sort of leaves
you on a cliffhanger you're wondering
what will happen next but I think that
you know as I looked back at my body of
work ten years out in McDowell and then
and then I went I was a Rowan prize
fellow and I was spent six months at the
American Academy in Rome I was thinking
a lot more about how to how to bring
myself more to the work so to not have
the work be so sort of distanced but
rather to sort of actually bring it much
closer to myself and my own thoughts and
so one of the things that seemed
possible was that rather than taking
this kind of large form like
the email response or the the cereal to
sort of start to think about patterning
the text or designing the text more at
the sentence level and so in that regard
like certain authors like say bald or
Henry James or different people or
William gasps who wrote two essays about
the structure of sentences that I would
recommend one called the esthetic
structure of the sentence and the other
one called narrative sentences you know
those those authors are very influential
to me in terms of thinking about this
next phase of practices and and really
with sentences with smaller atomic units
you can build larger and larger chains
so I think as a designer I'm sort of I
love modular things and and systems and
so I think what I started to see in
literature's of digression were sort of
sentences that I kind of like to
characterize is like there and back like
where you you sort of show someone how
far something could go but then pull it
back to the place that it started or
round and round sentences sentences that
are like recursive sentences that are
sort of cut and paste where there is
active other texts inserted into those
sentences that sort of disrupt or divert
them somehow or texts that are like out
and about that are really sort of just
pointing things out to you and a kind of
in a kind of very you know playful way
so and I was also interested as these in
these longer longer this attempt to
write longer and more personally in in
sort of engaging some of the like the
genres of design writings so you know I
don't have a great inventory of these
yet but to that I think I thought of
immediately were sort of the alphabet as
information as DNA so like the building
blocks of life as the alphabet which I
wrote an essay called L IFE about and
lots of designers have written that
essay in lots of different ways which is
why I would describe it as a genre and
then you know the story of the basic
shapes of the triangle the circle in the
square so sort of like what those shapes
mean and what their origin stories are
hover mythic or composed lots of
designers have sort of written about
that too and so when I went to Rome I
guess I was that I brought these these
ideas with me and
my project in Rome was about walking in
the city and using my own body and my
own perceptions to think about how the
writing could be more personal but also
thinking carefully about technology and
how technology sort of both distances us
and is ever-present in the city both
then and now and so I'll read that the
last reading I have is from a long essay
called triangulation and this is the
opening of section 2 a few weeks later I
see someone I know walking through tryst
a very we joke and catch up a bit after
he leaves I think of that classic
painting by corbeil the meeting which
shows the artists with his patron along
with the patrons servant and dog meeting
on a road in the countryside it hangs in
Montpellier France worker Baker boos
patron lived the city had no Roman
heritage and it and many of its oldest
sites were Jewish it was long a center
of trade and this religious tolerance in
the 14th century a man named Roche or
Rocco lost his parents at age 20 and
walked to Rome during plague where he
ministered to the sick he was later
canonized and the Church of San Rocco in
Rome sits adjacent to the tomb of
Augustus its facade
now obscured by Richard Myers ARA Pacis
building along the loo coat every
coreboot corbeil left France at the end
of his life after suggesting a column
should be torn down and relocated for
this a fine of three hundred and thirty
thousand francs was levied against him
payable in 10,000 franc installments for
the next 33 years
Courbet fled to Switzerland and soon
died of alcoholism after the first
before the first installment was due but
I wonder if before he died and upon his
arrival in Switzerland he found a
curious story in the Swiss newspapers on
the medical case of Albert das a gas
worker from Bordeaux whose job provoked
such anxiety that dhatus fell into a
walking fugue known as drama mania or an
uncontrollable urge to wander the artist
Johann furka writes of his symptoms
dhatus wept because he could not present
prevent himself from leaving when the
urge to travel arose he would abandon
everything he had and leave immediately
and it would usually begin
with him in the middle of his daily
routine hearing of some remote place and
suddenly setting off walking with only
the money he had in his pocket towards
that destination dhatus was the first
pathological tourist though by the turn
of the century the diagnosis had faded
from fashion without papers or
profession Dada's wandered as far as
Istanbul in Moscow and was finally
exiled by the Russians to Siberia
Augustine says the soul is restless
Dada seems to have lived it I stopped
for an espresso and I find an English
newspaper open on the table there's an
interview with a new winner of the Nobel
Prize in Literature Patrick Modiano
reportedly the Nobel Academy was unable
to reach mr. Modi on Oh before the
announcement during a halting nearly
hour-long news conference at his
publisher gallimard headquarters mr.
Modi ah knows that he learned he had won
when his daughter called him as he was
walking in the street quote I was a bit
surprised so I continued walking he said
I understand Modi jános desire to stay
on course for just a little while longer
before his life changed so completely
there's something almost instinctive
about it animals use their body position
head position and a kind of relative
distance grid to find their way along
with cues from muscles joints visual
input and even magnetism all part of an
evolutionary method called path
integration the information from these
various inputs mirrors our own method of
dead reckoning short for dedicated
reckoning or knowing where you are based
on the calculation of time speed
distance and direction navigators
contrast this with another method called
pilotage or knowing where you are based
on landmarks with dead reckoning
navigation is continuous and the route
may have many adjustments or legs along
the way so Modiano may have been walking
out of instinct but as I think more
about it he may have also been trying to
out walk the news as well faced with
returning to a life he did not recognize
he may have tried walking just a bit
further than usual out of his way
walking to forget the Buddhist practice
walking meditation which I tried one day
on my way back to Monteverde on my way
home from dinner with each step you make
yourself more conscious of having taken
it than than being who you are
right foot stepping I said to myself
left foot stepping and again this was
true in their Renaissance as well in
your neighborhood you were recognized if
you walked but if you've walked far
enough you would be lost and your
surroundings would lose you without
surveillance or centralized forms of
identification your identity was
grounded right proximity we know which
Leonardo we mean because he came from
Vinci and you can never truly and while
you can never truly out walk where
you're from the disorientation we feel
can often paradoxically be solved by a
refusal to stand still the cynic
Diogenes of Sinope a is known for
advancing this idea soul Vittori unbel
ando he tells us it is solved by walking
so many thinkers have been walkers
nietzsche walked all day not to rest or
feel better but to jot down notes he
would expand upon in the evenings the
easily rankled Rimbaud would walk to
blow off steam and once quipped that I
am a pedestrian nothing else even the
blind war has triangulates between
writing dreaming and guiding or movement
quote what writing is nothing more than
a guided dream he says if there is
something very linear about writing
something that points moves and directs
it's there no matter how illusory that
effect might be the writer is the Walker
we see through the Walker's eyes there's
a great literature of ReWalk essentially
what any pilgrimage is made of indeed a
guided walk is often a walk recreated
wgz bald is a master of this as Roland
Bart observes in the pleasures of the
text the pleasure of the text is that
moment when my body pursues its own
ideas for my body does not have the same
ideas I do at times as I'm walking it's
hard not to think of Walter Benjamin in
the arcades walking here and there lost
in his thoughts making notes for an
infinite project as he prepared to begin
he invoked the image of mosaics just as
mosaics preserve their majesty despite
their fragmentation into capricious
particles so philosophical contemplation
is not lacking and momentum both are
made up of just the distinct and the
disparate and nothing could bear more
powerful testimony to the transcendent
force of the sacred image and then the
truth itself
the relationship between the minut
precision of the work and the
proportions of the sculptural or
intellectual whole demonstrates that
truth content is only to be grasped
through immersion in the most minut
details of the subject matter around the
same time as he wrote this 1927 or so I
had started a Benjamin had started a
radio broadcast including a show for
children
his voice is warm though perhaps a bit
tired his readings are deliberate even
without my speaking any German I find
them soothing after the age of radio in
the age of GPS we find ourselves in a
world of ceaseless persistent location
often as I walk in Rome I snap photos
with my GPS enabled phone I'm stealing
images says the philosophers Frederick
gross while in the countryside I might
take comfort and losing myself a city
walk offers the pleasures of the thief
across town at the British school I
walked to meet an archaeologists 40 she
makes computer models of Rome and
described the process to me at first
there was an attempt at fidelity pure
virtualization a definitive rendering of
the city that could be flown over in a
god-like way her method represented a
second wave knowing that we can never
know it existed she opted for an
experienced and speculative approach
temples homes government buildings each
was reduced to a set of formulas and
properties a list of materials that
responds to the amounts and types of
those materials found throughout the
city this residue and these behaviors
were then modelled to produce a Rome
that might have existed tomorrow she
could produce another and another and
although much changed between each
output and leaving the actual structure
of the city unknowable and unvirtuous
about certain behaviors were reinforced
in model after model a set of flows
remained the program of the city was
revealed models of Rome produced an
illusory attempt at reality programs of
Rome produce a realistic array of
signals and signals more than models
suggest direction without requiring
guidance with signals you wander if
you're reading them right your head
and hands-free with them we can navigate
without navigating almost unconsciously
in a frame of mind that is almost like
dreaming so wedded to the body itself
walking is difficult to co-opt
the March remember is an enduring symbol
of resistance Martin Luther King
famously ended a march with the story of
dream when we walk we often dream at
least I do thanks
