good evening everyone I'm like to
welcome you some say good evening like
to welcome you to the third of the MLK
series for this year we have Tim Wise
Andrew Young and today we're very
pleased to have faith Ringgold I've got
a few messages to give fire exits the
fire exits are where you came in at the
back and also behind so should something
go wrong don't run carry someone with
you know just and orderly nothing will
go wrong there will be a book signing at
the end so survey this kind agree to be
up here so if you have purchased books
please feel free to come up with you
orderly here and so I kind of have the
privilege of introducing this my name is
pre trial for the theurgy that they know
me and the provost at RISD and I'm
always sort of intrigued about how to
start these things always I never really
know what to talk about I never really
know how to get into relationships and
they're sort of struggled with it not
all of my life in some respects and so
when I sort of think about standing up
here and welcoming a speaker who's had
such an illustrious career and I'll talk
a little bit about that I'm kind of
strike in terms of what the hell have I
been do with my life what's been going
on for me what's actually being
happening and I'm struck by sort of
Anthony Giddens comment that we're all
involved in a project of self a
reflexive project of self that we make
these gestures out into the world and as
we made them we also learn about
ourselves is is they occur and there's
something faith said at dinner tonight
which was about making art not for
someone else but for yourself and in
that the hope that you will reveal
something about yourself that someone
else may be interesting as well and I
was really struck by that notion of sort
of your own reflective practice so you
just put together some sort of really
quick words and one things I've always
been interested in personally is this
notion of the established than the
outsider and this is based on work by a
sociologist Norbit a lie
yes and it was a study of a
working-class village in the north of
England and he was particularly
interested in how even in that
working-class sector that people were
all similar but there were people that
were established know people that were
outsiders and I think with some of the
conversations that began in sending the
RISD campus over the last cuts up at
Brown it oxford university at Cambridge
University this whole notion of the
establishment the outside of the
marginalized and what does that mean and
so those notions of being the outside
and of course is artists sometimes we
want to be Outsiders we don't want to be
in the establishment there are other
times we want to be in this damage Minh
and how does that work so like Elias is
studying in conjunction with his
doctorate students kotzen was
fascinating because he looked at sort of
a number of configurations but one the
Peter wanted to talk about in particular
was the role of gossip and the role of
gossip in terms of belonging to the
establishment while you're an outsider
they're all of the outsider and the
gossip and stories we tell each other
and what was interesting is got gossip
and this is where language becomes
really interesting so normalize was it
was German and he moved over to Britain
eventually during the Second World War
because of Nazi regime because of
persecution an in German in Dutch there
are many words for the word gossip and
so he associates Gusterson mostly if I
say the word gossiped how many of you
think that's a bad thing gossip is a bad
thing this is quite a few you bring up
so apparently the Dutch and the Germans
have many words for gossip and some of
the words actually mean good gossip and
so gossip as a tool of social control
works both ways but we have this
association that gossip is a bad thing
but we all use gossip so we all tell
stories about ourselves through gossip
will also tell stories about them that
they are like this they behave like this
so those tools of gossip in terms of
this relationship to establish an
outsider's we all do it and we all do it
and we demonize so we will demonize the
outsiders by saying they all behave like
this they all still they all don't
and so this gross generalization that we
all use as a sense of creating our own
established weakness it's kind of really
fascinating and we're doing it we're
doing it now we are generalizing we are
stereotyping and what we have to do is
keep checking our own biases I think we
have to keep stopping and just checking
our own biases about which one are we at
the moment because quite often we're
both we can be both established and the
outsider at the same time and so this
sort of separation that we have of being
someone that is outside being
marginalized we're also marginalizing
others by our actions so paying
attention to that thing's a really
important part and paying attention to
what we find ourselves doing when we
talk about us let's get know that this
is always sort of i've no idea i'm going
to talk by the way this has always
intrigued me because things like they
talk about the stock market they say the
stock market has decided the stock
market is in panic the stock market
actually you me it's not a thing it's
not a person it's actually the
aggregation of all of our individual
actions so is the establishment it's an
aggregation of all of our individual
actions all of our own stories that we
tell ourselves so how do we actually
make sense of that and how do we move
forward with hope with dignity and with
integrity so transferred sort of pay
attention to that so something I've
always been interested in and so when it
comes to you as the artist and I mind my
background very time that I'm not an
artist and I'm a designer and but I've
always been seduced by the arts and I've
always been seduced by this notion that
you have yourself as a client you have
yourself as the person that you are
talking to so you are involved in this
own internal dialogue in this notion
that you cannot not be in your work it's
something that I believe really strongly
about because certainly my original
education was always the third person
singular you were not in it you were the
object if bystander as if you had no
input you were the chameleon that would
lose yourself to the surroundings
because you had no input
until you did not affect the situation
and I would argue cannot not be in your
word okay I'm just going to say that
again you cannot not be in your work and
so this notion that we have that the
arts are really about something internal
that is coming out as if there is no
audience is problematic in conversely in
design that it's not about you it's
about the audience as if there is no you
in the work is problematic so these two
extremes that we have you cannot not be
in your work but you also exist in a
social context so you do exist in the
context of others by definition you have
to exist with others so this is a
dialogue for me it has to be a dialogic
conversation so it is about you you
reveal yourself all the time so it's
just sort of a little ramp right onto
the wonderful faith ringgold and it was
interested in reading about faith in
sort of getting to know a little bit
about it through through the wonderful
electronic google thing and there's lots
of stuff written you can look at videos
you can look at him but actually the
most revealing for me was actually
meeting faith in sitting down the dinner
and talking through something and
hearing the stories that she engaged
with some of the other students it
really reveals a lot so I mean my note
to get the kind of faith ringgold
painter writer speaker mixed-media
sculptor artist writer activist
trailblazer performance artists lived in
Englewood New Jersey these are all
things facts you can find out about
faith they don't really tell you that
much about it they tell you certain
facts but not necessarily the person
she's professor emeritus at the
University of California San Diego where
she taught art from 1987 to 2002 she's
the recipient of more than 75 awards my
notes say 22 on read agrees with face
reminded me today that RISD actually
gave her an award says 23 honorary
degrees honry doctorates so that's a few
she's received fellowships and grants
include National Endowment for the Arts
Award for sculpture the painting Lana
pool a foundation for painting in France
the John's Guggenheim Memorial Fund
foundation fellowship for painting New
York foundation for the arts of water
painting the American session University
for travel to Africa the creative
artists public service of water painting
in Reynolds arts be inserted in many
museums and galleries around the world
is in many collisions Canada Europe Asia
South America Middle East Africa her
rights included in many many private and
public art collections Guggenheim bottom
ease in fine art Chase Manhattan Bank
Baltimore Museum it's a huge endless
list and I think I mean I just pulled up
some examples and I no effect is going
to show you many many more and what I
was interesting one of the the dinner
conversations was about being a black
artist but being a female artist then
she said being a woman actually Trump's
how you get in so being a woman it's
much harder to get into the art world so
we forget that some of these hierarchies
and power structures that exist out
there and I think certainly such have
some of the early work with the Whitney
for you get a chance to actually look at
the video if they talking about the
Whitney when it was the first black
exhibition as a woman she was not
allowed in so what does she do she
demonstrated that she got them to let
them in so I think that element of
actually taking ownership and
understanding how society stopping you'd
established in the outsiders you can
demonstrate you can actually make change
happen this is one of the early works
from one the early birds yeah the other
thing I'm really interested in faith is
her movement of art and how she's got
into books as you got into children's
books and i believe it's 18 children's
books now i think new ones just about to
be released
so I'd love to welcome faith ringgold
and just before I ask faith to car I
just have one quote from her that just
really resonated for me you can't sit
around waiting for somebody else to say
who you are you have to write it and
paint it and do it faithful
although it is a great pleasure to be
here with all of this beautiful art all
around me it's I don't know what life
would be like without art just think
about it it's so wonderful to be an
artist and to create art that speaks to
the world in some way and yourself in
particular thank you so much for coming
more than 60 years making art I need to
all materials in the program were
protected by united oh boy i stunk get
involved in that okay we can begin now
I'll put this down and let's see um now
how do I work this I should I use mine
or should I work this one I don't know
what ticket this one what is how you do
that think this is it yeah and I think
you advance what was the I don't see it
that arrow is your forward this
this one is forward oh it's XE doesn't
make a noise it just does it okay and I
can go back this way this I wanted to
start with this because this is this is
what I did in nineteen forty eight I was
18 years old entered the city college of
new york and I painted this painting of
still life which was what they were
teaching us they were teaching us about
artists who created still like pictures
and this was my first oil painting and I
what I kept it all these years it's in
my office in my studio today oh no i
think i'm going to homeboy okay okay now
here I wouldn't tell you this story
because in one of my classes we had a
homework assignment to make a what a
playing card the next week when we came
in of several of the students in the
class had come in and put up a whole
deck of cards and I said well you know
what's that I will classy you in they
said we're in your class and I said but
how come you've got a whole deck and we
were just told to make one playing card
why you have a whole day so they said we
can do what we want oh wow
but they were very competitive City
College was free if you didn't keep up
your what a-minus average you could be
thrown out we were constantly told you
know you might be sitting in somebody
else's seat so be careful so it was very
competitive they had gotten together
made a group and made a whole deck of
cards and I had come in with this one
card a jack now how am I gonna last
against them I was already the only
black person in the art department I
said well you know I don't get this but
it's never going to happen again as I
was not about to get thrown out of City
College okay however I never made my
deck until many years later and I don't
think I can show it to you guys I don't
think I brought it but I did it once by
first 2d design assignment in art class
at City College the other kids got
together after class had made a whole
thing I became amateur artists in the
1960s of the American people series and
backlight in 1960s was a time when
things changed in America it will never
be the same much of it was for the
better however there seems to be a
continuing longing for the one step
forward two steps backward that has been
a time-worn American Legacy since the
60s 1600 since the 1600s American people
Series the flag is bleeding I started in
nineteen sixty
seven and that is to show what was going
on in America at the time the 60s was
fabulous and fascinating there was
something new happening every day and it
was recorded on TV some of it and I
wanted to live in the moment and I did I
did it through my art here the American
people series continues with number 19
postage stamp commemorating the advent
of black power when we heard those words
black power that was that was fantastic
i mean to say black and power together
was unreal and i wanted to document the
time i wanted to have something to say
about what was happening all around me I
wanted those words in my painting so I
did a hundred faces 10 of which were
black there were ten percent black
people in America at that time and I
couldn't understand why is everybody so
excited about black powers only ten
percent of us here I mean come on the
real power is something quite different
yeah put your head to right now read in
white what is it w huh h I we said t e p
0 what is it
what is it white power that's the one
think about I put this in that painting
this is a commemorative stamp and it was
very pop because it was aight by six it
was well six x 80 that's pop because you
know stamps are 18 by six not even
inches and i made it eight by six feet
so that was fun I was a lot of fun yeah
these paintings are now well they're
getting bored now isn't that interesting
how many years 57 since the 60s this one
is at the Museum of Modern Art they just
bought it amazing this painting is of a
spontaneous street riot which we had a
lot of in the 60s and I wanted to record
that to put blood that was filled that
we never saw in the write-ups about the
riot I mean it couldn't it could not get
written up about also but even if it was
the pictures did not show the blood and
the ferocity of the what was going on in
the street I know because I'd be there
sometime and I would notice that either
there was no picture or there was a
picture that was very blurred and not
able to be seen so I painted this and in
the sometime in the 80s I was in a
museum and it was one exhibit there and
these little children were standing
there looking
and the teacher said oh you're feeling
like I said yes and she said oh would
you talk to my students and I said sure
and I said to them that you know I
wanted to do a painting i did this
painting for a lot of reasons and one of
the reasons was that we never got to see
the blood that was being spilled in the
streets during his rights they wouldn't
show it to us in the newspapers and so I
wanted to make sure that this painting
had with them but whereas I was painting
the blood I could just feel it was just
awful I mean painting blood is is very
upsetting and one little boy said to me
these kids were about six seven eight
years old what blood so by the 80s this
wasn't even any blood there was so much
violence going on this was not
considered that kid couldn't even see
what I was talking about what blood
where times change and change this is
now at the Museum of Modern Art
I changed after the black power I wanted
to show art that was not had they didn't
have any white ink that the colors
because most of the colors have to be
what mixed with some white that's the
way the chemistry of oral pain and
acrylic is in order to have the the
colors snap and pop they have to be
lifted up or other than that they are
what transplant and I was trying to
create a situation where i could
eliminate mixing white with the colors
it wasn't possible actually I would have
to mix the white bring up the color and
then put some black a Titch not too much
yeah just a little yeah and I called a
series black light flagged for the moon
die this is now a what in the I
think this in the collection of Harvard
University um this was very hard to do
Oh chase no chase bank David Rockefeller
sent his people over from chase bank to
buy one of my works and no it's not a
chase bank excuse me but David
Rockefeller said people over to look and
one of the pieces that I showed them was
this piece and they had they had seen
die and old blood and all that and flag
is bleeding and they said look we better
go
because we you know we can't buy any of
this because you know bank chase bank
okay so I brought this out and the woman
said to the guy look we better grab this
because it's a flag it's okay so he said
yeah but read it she said read it why
are you reading it there's nothing to
read here so with this woman right stuff
you know yeah but there's no blood
there's no okay d IE look at the stars
you see a d IE and he said yeah but so
what doesn't matter it you know what are
you saying just dye it let's grab it and
go oh she said put your head to the left
this time left Maori and I ji ji oh my
god uh I said look we have to go we
can't stay any longer it's getting worse
so they left and they say we'll be back
we'll be back we can't do any more today
anyway I did get a piece for them I
don't think I have it here but uh there
was a lot of controversy over the
writing of this is it this is it I found
this piece one of the few ones that I
showed them that didn't have any words
in it this was i called it uh I forgot
my title but anyway they said when I
showed them they came back and when they
came back
I showed him this painting and this is
supposed to be America this is this is
what America is um I called it six
shades of black that's what I called it
and my mother told me don't name your
painting just call it don't call it
anything and you're not calling anything
so that's why people say untitled
because they know that a lot of people
by work dependent on the title of it she
said well you might take a little
something from them so i said okay i
won't mention the title but i'll show
them this painting because there's no
writing on it so they looked and they
said look let's take this this is
perfect this is wonderful look there's
no writing nothing it's just six phases
doesn't matter we'll call it the
American spectrum heart is that okay I
said yeah sorry oh my goodness titles
are very important I just want you to
know that you cannot act like they're
not because they are in the 1970s I
discovered my roots in African art and
began to paint and create art specific
to my identity as a black woman I made
dolls and mass inspired by my painting I
began to write in my art and to tell my
story not only with images but words and
in mast performances this was a really
fun time this I did for the woman's
house which was a prison in New York and
this was a lot of fun because women
weren't even doing these things then I
was trying to get the women women
prisoners to realize their potential you
can do all these things you can be a
sports person you can play basketball
you can be a policeman you can be a
college professor yes you can be a
minister of a church
and have people that you give weddings
too so i made this painting all women in
it no men the men are all cut off
because it's very hard to do a picture
that tells a story with no men in it but
I did this one and they really liked it
and it's a whole long story about that
too slave rape number to run you might
get away is a Tonka of that I need I've
made a lot of tanka tanka so wonderful
I've been to Japan and I had seen the
wonderful tankers that they had there
and I was very inspired because I wanted
to paint larger and larger but I wanted
to be able to pick the paintings up
myself not have to wait until my husband
got home and you know with the stretched
canvas over the stretcher bars makes the
paintings very heavy and I like painting
big so I started making these tankers my
mother made the Tonka and I painted the
picture run you might get away slavery
number two these are oh here is also one
of my dolls series the Carters huh it
did an international doll series because
I wanted to make sculptures but I didn't
want to use any kind of material that
would get up in my nose and give me as
much as I have allergies and I ended up
making this and they really liked it I
call the White House and I said send me
a picture of glauca and the family and
they did huh Oh wonderful family of
woman masks my mother and her mrs. Jones
and family that so that's my mother my
brother my sister
and me life-size acrylic on canvas that
these are masks I also went to Africa
I've traveled all over the world looking
at the art everywhere and Nigeria and
Ghana I would think my favorite places
they're gorgeous masks that Picasso was
able to create with and where they
looking at those masks and the art of
Africa created the modern art movement
and I wanted to go over there cuz I
didn't learn anything about that at City
College they didn't teach me that no I
had to teach myself some of that you
have to teach yourself you cannot depend
on learning everything in the classroom
is the purple doll yes indeed that's
what these were fun to do actually I did
five of those there's a gold face masks
when I went to Africa I thought I had
studied a lot about African art but when
I went to Africa I saw masks like I
would have never seen if I hadn't gone
there fantastic art everywhere in
nineteen eighty i completed my
autobiography bird took me 15 years to
find a publisher Oh things are hard in
this world who was afraid of entre mama
was my first story quilt my
autobiography reef Lou over the bridge
the memoirs of faith wrinkle was finally
published by little brown in 1995 took
me 15 years and reprinted by Duke press
in 2005 it was when I went to Africa
that I realized I needed to write my
autobiography needed to tell my story in
words this is the white face mask number
four these are the kinds of mass that I
was introduced to in Nigeria and Ghana
masks that you could dance in because
they get the big eye holes and you could
sing I painted the images my this is my
very
quilt echoes of Harlem my mother sold
those pieces together to make this quilt
I did the painting all of my quotes are
painted this was my first story quilt
when I found out that I was not going to
be able to what publish my autobiography
because the publisher that I had thought
that it just was not a story of a black
woman's life you know I hadn't been
raped and beat up and thrown out the
window that wasn't on welfare and none
of that it was about growing up in
Harlem going to school getting married
having children being an artist and that
was not something that she thought was a
good story for me and so she decided no
I don't want to push us that is a
violation of my freedom of speech I want
to tell my story and so i will i will
tell it without having to go through a
publisher i'll write it on my art my art
gets published and i'll get my story
published the same way and that is how i
got a lot of work published and my first
story first children's book also tar
Beach Street story quilt another story
so I just began telling stories and
writing them on Michael Sonny's quote my
friend Sonny Rollins who lived up the
street from thee he used to go up on the
bridge to blow his horn so you know it
wasn't just me that was having problems
his neighbors didn't want to hear him
play
his own all the time so he'd go up on
the bridge into it nobody's gonna stop
him there woman on a bridge number one
tar Beach was the first one of the
series of the woman on a bridge series
the text of tar Beach was my first
children's book published by Random
House in 1991 now it is in the
collection of the Solomon R Guggenheim
Museum where animals published my first
children's book toy beach and these are
all the books that i published after
that i really had wonderful publishers
and oh it's it's been fantastic and also
it's a joy to create books for children
and here's his pictures of them see
there or we came to America is is is
coming out shortly in may i think in
Harlem Renaissance party was published
in 2015 he's a some of the rest of my
books Maya's quilts of life was
commissioned by by Oprah Winfrey and
sold at auction just recently this was
exciting very very exciting now here we
are me and maya and Oprah back in the
day
oh and there I am at a what's the name
of that museum crystal bridges in
Arkansas it's a new museum and it is so
beautiful and they bought this at
auction and I'm posing
it's fun woman on a bridge number two
just also got sold at auction so I mean
it takes a while to get people who give
you the freedom that you need as a
person freedom is not free that's one
thing that's very certain freedom of
speech I was commissioned by the
Constitution Center in 1990 to create
this a poster print actually this is
acrylic on paper but it was made into a
poster that is in the metropolitan
museum of art and it is um it's so
wonderful I i loved i love doing this
this was a lot of fun to do to say
freedom of speech and what it means it's
not just freedom to say what pleases
others its freedom to say what is
whether it is appealing to others or not
as long as it is the truth flying home
Harlem heroes and heroines this is in
the subway a glass mosaic commissioned
by the MTA installed in the IRT so wait
on 24 street in harlem this was so much
fun to do great people that I grew up
with in Harlem flying over the buildings
there is the NAACP and and the people
flying over flying over Mary McLeod
Bethune web2 boys I grew up with those
people living all around me in Harlem
there's a wonderful experience ah more
Jesse Owens
marcus garvey and adam clayton powell
flying over the Abyssinian Baptist
Church this has been there since what
1996 Josephine Baker Duke Ellington and
Bessie Smith flying over the Cotton Club
Oh a lot and Joe Lewis and Sugar Ray
Robinson flying home the ink spots Jerry
Daniels geek Watson bill Bowen and Bill
Keaney and here are the artists um mr.
your Museum in Harlem is the building
and then the artists Augusta savage
Jacob Lawrence romare bearden Norman
Lewis and aaron douglas i should have
put myself in there huh no but I did I
wanna do you don't want people to take
it seriously I don't wanna one of them
to say oh she just fainted that so she
could put herself in it no yeah but
these people lived at hall and they
lived all around me in a lot of ways
however as I was when I was a child I
didn't know they were famous I don't
think they knew either I don't think
they knew they were famous either but I
knew them they continued to work against
great adversity and today they are now
well known yes but not then people
portraits 52 mosaics designed and
installed for Los Angeles County oh this
is another series of mosaics that I did
with it was so much fun they advertise
this
a set of mosaics they wanted 52 of them
to go in a subway in San Diego and what
I did was I made up all 52 images on
they were going to be 48 x 24 something
like that that was going to be the
finished mosaic I made mine six inches
by three inches on six inch by 3 inch
coloreds huh because i know that when
people are going to Commission something
they want to see what it's going to look
like they don't want you to just talk
about what you're going to do and all of
that they want to see and so I showed
them and I want it there were about 10
people applying maybe so if you ever get
an opportunity to have a commission for
something show them what it is you plan
to do you know in a small scale of
course but don't try to just talk about
it they want to see it
line in styling i named it and I I made
all 52 of them dancing at the Louvre a
French collection is a series that I did
in France this was a wonderful wonderful
experience and they're inviting me to
come back again and do something else so
to figure out what I want to do this
time the American collection does he I
and I'm giving tribute to the artists in
America and the artists in Europe who
inspired me that's what the American
collection in the French collection all
about we came to America you see is a
painting here of a slave ship that gets
blown up by the Statue of Liberty who
originally was a black woman but America
turned it down so I forgot the name of
the the sculptor who created the
sculpture he had to use his wife and say
so the one that is currently the Statue
of Liberty is really a portrait of his
wife so I thought I would do the one
that was the original one which was a
black woman which they didn't want of
course but as an artist I could do what
I want and so I did we came to America
and what happens here is the Statue of
Liberty sends blows up the slave shipper
and the slave jump overboard and what
swim to America free it's my fantasy huh
so so wonderful about being an artist
you can just make it up if you want I
mean who can stop you we call it freedom
of speech
born in a cotton field a collection of
Denzel Washington this is another whole
story that I had hope about this little
girl who's born in a cotton feeling
becomes a princess it is and it's in the
book invisible princess how many of you
know that book invisible princess okay
mm-hmm we live in a peaceful village of
freedom and love in harmony with our
brothers and sisters by all the stars
above we live in a beautiful village
full of happiness and joy dedicated to
the freedom of a remand and woman in
every girl and boy yeah
we moved to englewood this is my husband
he's in a nursing home now so I'm
missing him a lot but we moved to
Englewood New Jersey because I i needed
a studio huh that was bigger than I
could get in New York anywhere so we
went over there and we got ended up with
a garden and everything back garden
steps and now that he's in the nursing
home you know it's too much for me so I
think I want it I want it to be a
private Museum I'm working it to that
event it's the garden pond with swans
pong with gazebo this is my
great-great-grandmother Suzie Shannon
who lived to be a hundred and ten yes an
tastic woman coming to jones road part 1
now I've done a lot of coming to jones
road now made up stories to go with it
because what happened when i came to
jones road in Englewood New Jersey I ran
into a whole lot of conflict and the way
I've dealt with it was to change it and
tell a story that made it feel good
instead of bad and this is my husband
coming to Britain ringo that's part two
of the coming to Jojo it it just goes on
and on it took me what eight years in
the court to get to build that studio
because i had to get permits and the
neighbors kept piling up and saying that
i was trying to do something else
whatever they could do to stop me but of
course they couldn't stop me because I
was not going to stop until i got the
permits and I
did no I was not going to stop and this
series of paintings is the most
lucrative of all the series of paintings
that I've ever done escape to freedom
Harriet Tubman and a nyomi this is part
two these tankers my mother made me and
I had nothing to put in them until what
2010 and she said oh you don't need any
pictures in these mother my mother was a
very unusual person very unusual but I
finally did get some pictures together
and this is one I have a dream Martin
Luther King framed in a Tonka mother
made me in nineteen seven see my mother
made it in 72 but I didn't I didn't
think of what to do with it until 2010
she would I think she would love this
Martin Luther King jazz series mama can
sing Papa can blow at series in 2004 and
then I made a whole other series of jazz
singers uh known all over the world they
don't have the problems that we artists
have everybody knows that mama can say
and Papa can blow and they do all over
the world here is Martin Luther King's
letter from birmingham city jail
published by the limited editions club
this is a series that I did for the
limited editions Club of New York this
was wonderful I I just really enjoyed
doing this series really telling martin
luther king's story of why he ended up
in the Birmingham jail
can you imagine there are counties
without a single Negro registered to
vote the right to vote police brutality
viewed through stained glass windows who
worships here who is their God MLK well
I'm Luther King really made a great
contribution for more than two centuries
our for parents labored in this country
without wages he's explaining to a group
of ministers why he's in jail why is he
in the Birmingham jail and here is the
declaration of freedom and independence
and illustration and interpretation of
freedom in America this one is well it's
a heavy duty statement probably those
challenging work of art I have ever
created are these six illustrations of
the Declaration of Independence number
one all men are created equal and women
a letter from Abigail Adams to John
Adams
hey I a woman said Jenna true what time
is it am I going over what's the story
how are we doing okay I'll speed it up a
little bit this was so much oh I felt so
wonderful doing this I think it was a
little bit too much for said though I
think he got he he bit off more than he
could chew when he asked me to do this a
little bit too much what freedom of
speech huh a little bit too much but you
shouldn't ask me
it was Oh absolute Tyranny taxes on us
without our consent this was the Troy
doing these I could get you you have the
book right you have the book of letter
from a Birmingham jail am I correct well
I could give you this one huh is that
good yeah we have appealed to their
native justice and magnanimity when I
was in elementary school we celebrated a
day called I am an American day one year
I won the contest for my school freedom
of speech was and still is the main
difference between black Americans and
other oppressed people in the world I
was brought up to understand that in
America my freedom was not more than a
promise that would be a struggle and
could be in many instances denied as
free and independent states my
intentions here are to tell the story of
America's Declaration of Independence
imposed upon the African Americans
struggle for freedom dedicated to the
American people who in 2008 elected our
first black president barack obama to be
the 44th President of the United States
will we jump back in 2012 if so how high
well we got him for another four years
huh now what are we going to do
whoa yes we can born in the USA say okay
serigraph additional 25 this is an
interesting thing that I did I just
painted this it was the actual model was
made by who was the name the right
museum I can't remember the name of the
guy who did it it was interesting he
asked a lot of different orders to do
them these are flags stories that i made
when 911 happened i was so shocked and
so upset I just said I'll just have to
paint things until I can get over this
on Tuesday morning we face the devil in
the sky and told him that freedom will
never die I just kept on doing these
well Tuesday morning you called me from
the burning sky you're searing words of
pain will forever remain encrusted in my
heart my darling we are facing the devil
in the sky a hateful man with a hellish
plan for all of us to die there is a
mountain in every valley but is there a
safe haven in the sky if so we will try
if not my darling I love you goodbye
there were people calling their
relatives who were on that plane and
they were trying to communicate with
them it was fantastically oh I I'll
never forget it and I I made all these
flags during that time this is number
three ninety virgins on their way to
heaven ran into 90 ah from hell
hello pretty virgin ladies where are you
going on this lovely day it's 911 and
we're on our way to heaven to meet 19
suicide bombers there well well do tell
911 suicide bombers in heaven we think
not heavens not where they're at has
been a huge mistake but for heaven's
sake what's a little sin will get you in
and we can double datum in hell freedom
flag story number three
this was war takes a toll on young men
sends them home in body bags or out of
their minds let's find another way to be
free maybe light and fight an old man's
war don't nobody get hurt just talk
tough and keep out of danger at night go
to sleep in a bed no more war maybe one
day
I have a series of these tributes to
different people I want to do one to
Hillary and this is my latest project is
cool to do Co it's my game yes huh yeah
sudoku is my art game faith ringgold is
my name play my game and you'll have fun
it's for young and old and everyone and
that's not all when you've won glory be
hang it on the wall for all to see go
get it cool to do go blogspot.com next
that's the way it looks when you make it
up into a poster huh it's the same like
Sudoku except that it's got colors and
stuff trace for success as an artist huh
I should have bought some posters here
for you to rate yourself huh the traits
gender race education vision commitment
/ dedication passion support opportunity
cultural id place / environment total
points100 how much you good hmm
what would America be like without 400
years of black history not to mention
250 years of slavery and 150 years of
freedom we came to America okay thank
okay thank you very much
okay thank you for and are there any
questions don't everybody speak at once
there are there Mike friends at the
front Sophie and they've they're gonna
come to you do questions 11 at the front
just a weird okay good speak mr. Ringo
thank you so much for that informative
lecture you just gave us I wanted to
talk going to if you might talk a little
bit about the the textile pattern design
that you use to create that you use that
incorporated within your work that you
use it's a textile pattern from Africa
oh I don't think I knew what you mean
the design the eight sort of eight
pattern design that you use all the
young guba yes the kuba yes yeah what
about it I just read up on it a little
bit when I was investigating some of
your other work and was considering it
using that type of pattern within some
new graduate work that I'm doing I just
wanted you to talk a little bit about it
because well really powerful and you
spoke a little bit about it in an
article about it's really great to use
that type of design in doing when when
doing collaborations yeah it um I've
used it a lot and that's why I'm really
glad that I I traveled over there
because I got to see things that I
hadn't really seen in books and I've
used that cougar design a lot it's it's
wonderful to dot design is so powerful
you know that's that's one of the things
that that you are getting here is that
design and
sounds different in with different
people all over the world huh they
express themselves through the way in
which they incorporate color shape form
line in their work so that you can
almost look at it and tell where it's
coming from is it asian is it African
huh that's its powerful very very
powerful here and then you can take that
and be inspired by it and go where you
want to go with it ya koba design is
wonderful hello it there are any other
questions just up behind them nobody
else no questions yes I have a mic so i
guess i'll go um I was wondering if you
could talk about your creative process
you're working in stories and they take
so many mediums what comes first the
story or the pictures or the words well
the first thing I do I have the idea
idea and then I begin to put it together
in some way if it's going to be a book
then I have to have some characters what
happens okay in it what is happening who
is it happening to who does what what
did they say I got some dialogue going
I'll get my story who said who what and
then I illustrated but I have to know
what it is first before I start that
that's if it's going to be some kind of
book now if it's going to be art like
now I'm working on paintings
about aging a series of paintings on
Aging and so there's not words now no
text as such but what it is is where are
the images coming from and they are
coming from the look of Aging and what
is the look it's a body thing it's it's
the formulation of the face the body in
such a way that it speaks to the change
from a little beautiful baby huh to
something else I don't have it together
yet but I go to the nursing home and see
my husband there and I'm putting it
together it's coming up it's going to
come up I want to I want to do this but
the quilted duco is something that has
to do with the mind and I would love to
have that be on itunes now it is on
itunes but you have to know it's there
to get you understand you can't just go
to iTunes and see it laid out but if you
know it's there you can put cool to do
co dot gmail.com and it will come up or
you know we read it from one of my cards
I don't understand why that's happening
I think that there's some kind of demand
for a corporation to sponsor games on
iTunes I think that's what it is and I
think maybe that the reason for that is
that that will ensure a certain amount
of money that an individual may not be
able to give but I'm not going to stop
until
so you can go on itunes and find it
there without knowing it's there huh cuz
I can't get a get a card to everybody in
the world it's crazy you understand what
I'm saying I believe that's the problem
and uh I don't like that I gotta find a
way to get around that and I don't know
how to do it yet but I'll figure it out
oh ok just want to make sure was working
uh howdy I just wanted to um kind of
talk with you about kind of some
personal things that I'm going through I
don't want to get too much in the detail
but being a trizzy has kind of it's been
like this continuous process for me as a
black man to kind of come to terms with
who I am in the space and I've never
really been too keen on kind of
addressing that kind of issue like me as
minority here but I feel like with a lot
of my work right now I'm trying to reach
for something but I can't really
describe like what it is I know it has
to do with me but I've been like really
balled up lately trying to like kind of
figure out what exactly i'd want to say
what my story would be and I guess I was
wondering if you ever experienced that
and what kind of got you through well I
think and I think everybody goes through
that trying to find out who you are and
what you were about what is your story
when I found out what I needed to do was
when I went when I started traveling and
I went to Nigeria and Ghana and I saw a
fantastic art and I was very much
influenced by it
and I came home and and the first thing
I wanted to do is write my autobiography
because it was the first time in my life
I had been anywhere where I was so
inspired every place I went I saw images
of black people that made me so proud I
just whoa those people was so wonderful
I mean it was a whole what history that
I knew nothing about before I came there
and I i wanted i wanted to share it with
the world i think it's important to
reach yourself you are the center of
everything that happens in your work and
you do have the freedom we do have
freedom of speech in America you can say
what you want and do what you want
luggage you're not yelling fire in a
crowded room we have that you you must
use it now you just have to find out
what it is what do you want to say and
that's the thing that'd riches our
cultural experience we've had so many
people who felt that way and have given
us a wonderful art music and dance
they've taken that freedom in there you
stick to give themselves life and in
doing that we prosper and we learn to do
the same it's worth it it's hard you
have to first you have to route realize
what you realize that you're trying to
do it now you got to find a way to do it
and it's different for everybody what
can I say
you'll get there if you keep crying just
keep trying that's the key thank you
you're welcome just one behind uh thank
you mr. Ringo for coming out here
tonight as a person who grew up in
Harlem as a kid I'm just curious as to
your observations on how the
neighborhood of Harlem has changed from
the time you live there and into like
let's say the early 2000s oh there have
been some changes yes but a lot of
change a lot of people moved away now I
wish they could get back um yeah it's a
wonderful place to be though because
there's so much so much what so much
creativity huh it's just overflowing
with it I still have my apartment in
Harlem which I bought in 1991 to uh no
1962 when I married my second husband um
yeah I'll never give that apartment up
it was Dinah Washington Department you
know who Dinah Washington well Dinah
Washington lived there before me just me
and Dinah nobody else
and it became a co-op and they were it
was one of the fridge it was the first I
think b4 his co-op in Harlem in nineteen
fifty it was it was built in nineteen
fifty-six became a co-op in what 64
something like that and they I had the
prime apartment in the building that
Dinah had died not married some guy
named Oh was he nightrain football
player and then they divorced and she
died she wanted to come back lies you
can't come back I'm gonna do that I'm
staying and you're not coming back I'm
sorry she missed call him so I'm here
can I say and it became coop and they
the prices was so low it was amazing we
paid twenty seven thousand dollars cash
45 and a hat beautiful rooms parquet
floors of gorgeous that would never
happen today well today I can't even
tell you how much it's worth today it's
amazing it is worth a lot
ever we pay twenty seven thousand cash
the most expensive in the building was
our apartment and I am so and there were
people actually arguing but oh we're not
gonna bother well you do what you want
so the people who didn't buy it well
they eventually they had to move because
things you know they couldn't do it's
it's gorgeous a gorgeous apartment I
will keep it I use it for my foundation
ever thought the foundation call anyone
can fly foundation so what the mo is
going to keep it I use it to house my
volunteers who come to help with our
different projects that we're doing did
I answer your question thank you very
much likely you're welcome I want to
shut the back anybody else hello thank
you for coming today I'm just wondering
if you have any advice for young women
going into the art world who want to be
as recognized and as respected as their
male counterparts in whatever field they
choose to go into it I didn't hear the
last sentence what is that just advice
for young women starting out in the art
world yes who want to be as recognized
and respected as their male counterparts
in whatever field they choose to go into
wow that's a lot
yeah that that's that's a lot because
you know there isn't a lot of equality
with men and women not only here but
anywhere in the world I say that until
women all over the world in every
ethnicity in every country everywhere
are able to provide leadership in two
important fields none of us will ever be
free and those two fields or religion
and politics
and that that has not happened because
nobody's going to give you that freedom
you got to take it so when women figure
that out cuz we're not going to start
any war because we don't fine we don't
fight I mean we do little you know slap
on like that but we don't we don't fight
and we have children we don't want our
children to fight we don't want them to
die so we would not be for that and
religion has a lot to do with war and
you can do that because you don't have
to pick up anything heavy you know the
guys have all those muscles and they can
do all that not like them sorry yeah but
women can do that and and and when we
realize that it's our fault that all
this war happens that there's so much
destruction in the world as to religion
and politics we're not totally innocent
because we're sitting back and letting
the men do this we could stop them and
it would be benefit to the entire world
war doesn't get anybody anywhere it's
not the answer to anything and women
could stop it and I'm wondering when are
women all over the world not just women
here what about the women over there
women everywhere have to take care of
their situation and make it clear to
their men that some things are not
correct and we want them stopped and it
could happen
but women have to have the courage to do
it I probably will never see it but I
think it will happen one day yes got
time for one more question
this has been wonderful thank you so
much for inviting me
okay one more I find my mother as a huge
source of influence in my work and I
heard you talk about her sewing those
Tong cos for you and how a bit of her
personality influenced your work could
you talk a little bit more about who she
was as a person how she influenced you
and my mother yeah oh my mother was a
fashion designer she was so creative she
really wanted to be a singer dancer but
her family said no no no because it was
really I would say it was dangerous for
women to be in that field back there she
was born in 1903 and they didn't want
that but what you used to do and she was
cleaning the house she'd be dancing and
singing so that's where she got her
dancing and singing she came a fashion
designer and her fashion shows she would
take the mic and just perform for the
audience and half all her models come
out so she got a rounded but she was
really a performer she was such a
fantastic woman and she really made me
realize that I can do anything I want to
do just personally and stay in the game
don't let anybody stop you but me
somebody said you're agreeing beautiful
okay yeah
my mother was fantastic and I had asthma
as a child so I didn't go to school in I
didn't go to kindergarten or first grade
cuz my doctors didn't want me to be
exposed to the children's diseases you
know as asthma was very dangerous in the
30s and I remember once I was having an
attack and my mother said nobody ever
died of asthma now that was a lie but I
think she could tell that I was getting
ready to go out of here and she knew
that she had did something because the
doctor was on his way but he wasn't here
yet and my mother she had that kind of
spirit yeah nobody ever died of asthma
remember there was a fantastic woman in
so many ways who asked that question
yeah did I answer you you want to want
me to add something else what well my
father was a you know he was a man he
was plenty to yeah my father was good
too he wasn't there you know perfect of
course but um I like the idea that I had
to both of them they young they gave me
what I needed to survive in those days
the 30s it was rough was born in
nineteen thirty and uh there was a lot
going on that needed you needed strong
parents to help you through that
and I think I had them my father said
some funny things and he was really he
said they're not what did he say
something about the way we tore up the
pattern for that one he said about me we
tore up the pattern for that one what
can I say Thank You faith ring on thank
you
faith will be signing books at the front
if you want to come up just feel at the
side
