good evening everybody
it's with great pleasure that I welcome
you to the last lecture of the semester
so thank you so much for coming I know
it's a busy time but this should be an
exciting presentation and it's with
great pleasure that I also introduced a
kiyomi our lecture of tonight as well as
welcome him back to Ohio State a kiyomi
graduated with a BS la from our noble
institution in 1996 this was a time
before Norton at the tail end of the job
carpenter years for those of you who
know something about the history of the
program and for those of you who know
more about the history of football hold
on to your socks
first of all you're gonna hear me talk
about football which is something Accio
me studied landscape architecture along
no nails than Heisman Trophy running
back number 27 Eddie George full-disk
our full-disclosure have done zero
fact-checking on this so I'll let him
answer any questions you may have on
Eddie George's track record in the be
SLA program real or made-up I will
however give you a few details on how he
a key that is ended up at Ohio State
from Nera the eighth century capital of
Japan and where he went subsequently you
have to sort of imagine the cultural
shock of going from a city which is full
of pagodas and temples and Buddha's and
deer in the streets and so forth and
beautiful to Columbus not that Columbus
is not beautiful but must have been
quite a cultural shock so I came to the
US as an exchange student keen on
American music and movies he says and
never turned back his design pedigree is
as impressive as his entrepreneurial
spirit
after graduating from Ohio State with
the great skills that we know our alums
to have he worked at Hargreaves
associates before getting an mla - at
the Harvard Graduate School of Design
during his time at Harvard he and Chris
Reid co-founded yes you heard me
co-founded
the firm Stas landscape urbanism I will
let him answer any questions you may
have about that one ready for another
challenge a Kiyomi joined the San
Francisco office of EDA as a Senior
Partner he became a design principle of
IDO AECOM in 2009 and led their tokyo
studio in 2012 soon after he opened his
own firm in San Francisco office MA and
this year opened office Matt Tokyo
he and his partner Steve Anson have
projects in Beijing
haengju Tokyo and Los Angeles the choice
of MA as the name of a firm place to
Akio meas hybrid culture and his
commitment to design the Japanese Kanji
character for MA is a compound which is
very very graphic and appeals very much
to architects in particular or designers
in general where you have a gate
character framing the character for Sun
for day or for Japan and among the
several meanings of Maya find both
spatial and temporal associations
interval distance gap
pause relationship between span both
temporal and spatial and finally the
untranslatable concept of negative space
negative space is typically described as
a spatial concept and a consciousness of
place where one experiences form and non
form in ma emptiness and silence a pause
leave room for differences and tensions
to be reconciled ma is both time and
space and it is quintessentially
Japanese in the lineage of those with
the most professional education who
avoid professional boundaries a Kiyomi
describes himself as an entrepreneur
conceptual thinker urbanist sculpture
and landscape designer seeking ma the
void with unlimited opportunities I
think it's worth mentioning that he
brought a fresh Japanese eye to an
American landscape architecture
education he has in turn brought back to
Japan the more pragmatic concerns of
American practice straddling the domains
of landscape architecture and
infrastructure
establishing bridges between disciplines
and cultures he lives and works between
China Japan and the United States please
join me in welcoming back Akio me to
Ohio State thank you okay I think you
actually cut about 15 minutes of my
presentation that was a great
description of what my is it's always
actually hard to actually explain what
am I is so done a fantastic introduction
of MA so I can just go ahead champagne
good evening I'm a cure me above smile I
graduated from here for 20 plus years
ago so and I haven't been back since
since then that's all right so it's very
nice to be back and see the nice
buildings that's a great place for you
guys to work I we were at the brown fall
that doesn't exist anymore today I want
to actually spend some time briefly
talking about talk about what I have
done since I graduated almost all of
Ohio State and share some of our current
work let's start with what I have been
doing after Ohio State so as I know they
said I was exchange student came to Ohio
State in 96 and then after graduating
from 90 see our state 96 went to work in
Boston I work at the office code of
Morgan we lock for briefly that's where
I learn a lot of detailing
materiality of design and briefly after
that George Hodges became chair of our
GSD so he opened office in Cambridge and
that's when I moved to Hargreaves at her
grace I was involved in a master
planning project of at the University of
Cincinnati maybe some of you have
visited the site the campus the project
I was involved was the project called
Main Street that was to create a new
core of the campus connecting that to
existing open space within the campus it
was a unique opportunity for us and for
me because we got involved in the
project so early that we actually are
Landscape Architect but also we were
setting up the oven design framework
basically using the building as a way to
scrub the open space negative space we
control and basically building Heights
distance in betweens
and topography around it
back then we were using the crane model
as a primary design tool I don't know
how many of you still do that even the
presentations we are mostly using the
physical models twenty years ago these
were some of that built photos
I also worked on a university common at
East Campus this is a medical campus
this was a landscape in front of a Frank
Gehry buildings this was actually the
first project at Hargreaves where we use
the 3d programs during the schematic
design and design development and back
then we were using Holmes II as a
program I also work on the Louisville
Kentucky
Riverfront Park phase two projects again
mostly design study was done in clay
model then I decided to go back to
school trying to explore my own interest
in landscape I have done so I wanted to
know what I my personal interests were
at the GSD I took a super super fun
design studio with Judy Parkman where
thus I found approach that I found a
type of project that barely require a
different type of approach to design
looking at the site strategies along
with the site framework landscape
intervention that we Ward III was
proposing was mostly about the site
infrastructure to really come manage
that stormwater runoff from the
contaminated site and treating them all
so that became the way the people that
you are accessing the site so this
notion of the how the site actually
changed over time and that occupation of
the people into the site change over
time
so those are kind about my research or
interest during the GSD and then the
second year of GSD Chris lead has asked
me to join him to started off his core
estas so
this was our first project the small
residential project which was fun but
quickly we find out that this is not the
type of work that actually reward we
actually started slothful so we quickly
hope we focused our in our project focus
on more on the development of brownfield
as our focus we load a lot of proposals
to the EPA most of the proposal we were
lighting was originally it was intended
for that member for environmental
engineers so we were the only few
landscape design firm that actually was
going after this type of work we did
successfully got one of the project from
EPA that was in Lowell Massachusetts and
again here we were proposing to
redevelop that Superfund site by
established in the site framework and
also our work included the development
of project management operations
thinking about in terms of moving the
project horseradish cream so that was
kind of beyond just designing the
physical space
actual design proposal included a hybrid
of recreational park with a stormwater
management laying garden some wetland we
have also done a lot of a speculative
project this one's called performing
ground-up Homans ground where we were
using topography as a primary medium to
construct park in a post-industrial site
there was not much funding so what can
you do how do you how can you actually
create a park with a limited funding so
basically our our proposal was to
basically spend all of the money on site
po graffiti creating the whole site the
topography was corrupted to collect
dialect and store stormwater and
planting strategy that we came up was
relying on prevailing wind as a way to
actually disperse the plantings who are
using the animals as a way of dispersing
the plantings so those were kind of a
speculate speculative worked out we were
doing at the stores then after three
years or three years at the stores I was
asked to join the Edo San Francisco so I
moved to San Francisco to start the
design studio with my current design
partner Steve Hanson at at Edo I worked
on a very large public project micro San
Jose waterfront that was actually in
Lille introducing the new public space
along the existing working waterfront
industrial waterfront
basically this was a part of the
environmental lawsuit between the
community and port over San Jose and San
Jose was actually giving back the one
side of the canals and providing public
access to the working waterfront so this
was like first time in a long history
where the community could actually have
access to the waterfront so what we were
trying to do was to create this kind of
a juxtaposition of landscape where
people can actually look at it and
appreciate
working waterfront also we realize that
that scare of the space within this kind
of context is so big so we need to
actually think about how to actually
create the public space or the space for
people within this context so we needed
to actually think about what is actually
how do you really compete with or work
with the scale of the industrial scale
and then how does how does this become
the new identity or the community but we
also found this smaller intervention
where we could score most logically kind
of inserted this kind of the Overlook
again so different type of way of
actually appreciating what's going on in
context
another type of project I was involved
at Edo was mixed-use development this
one is actually the one in Tokyo called
Tokyo Midtown in here we were asked to
reinterpret the Japanese aesthetics but
they knew that this project was actually
catering toward outside audience the
motifs need to be not pure Japanese but
something actually familiar to Japanese
but something different so we were
proposing we didn't we'd intentionally
stay away from designing the gardens but
we wanted to actually design a park with
some of the essence of Japanese gardens
one of the example is like here we were
we were proposing to create a flexible
loan as a space that as anchor to the
commercial development usually you have
a anchor store instead we were proposing
this stuff very very flexible voice
space maybe you can call it ma the
clients actually hated it he's they said
don't do that no one's going to use it
we need some beautiful landscape we
insisted it they build it now they love
it they actually program a
regularly it's actually one of that most
popular destinations even after 12 years
of opening it still remain as one of the
most popular open space in Tokyo and
then I also start working in China at
Edo this was a project in question which
is outside of Shanghai the site was next
to the yunchan lake which is famous for
Shanghai crab that's that very very
productive kind of a water body and it's
very very important lease or natural
resource for social or creation so the
developer was planning to build on
developed and it a residential community
here they already had a master plan but
they weren't sure if they had a right
master plan so they asked us to come in
to do a workshop just to maybe what they
had and look at the site so we went to
the site we look at it and of course we
told them there they didn't have the
right master plan because what they had
was actually has nothing to do with the
swiss site and it was kind of a typical
approach where they were theming
everything nothing to do with what the
site was doing so what we proposed was
actually looking at the water system
within the site which is what you see on
the left hand side and basically the the
water water system didn't have much of
the ecological value it was not working
so our proposal was to leave the create
of entire site and then they introduced
the more appropriate water system to the
site which basically became the way to
define the landscape type Rajas and
increase the biodiversity and the
chronical value to the site
which make the much leisure habitat so
our our our our idea was to develop the
site in phasing and think of it as a
succession start out be conditioning the
site then slowly introduce the programs
so that across ecological values goes up
but then your development barriers also
goes up so it's not so that was the idea
I was a master plan created a different
type of zones within the site or the
communities based on the rice and
landscape type Rajas and within the each
landscape type we worked with the
architect to come up with the different
densities and different type of
architecture because we believe that
different type of landscape typology
have a different carrying capacity so we
wanted to actually we want to density to
be to be controlled by what kind of
landscapes actually we have created so
this is for instance this is that are
the some of the residential developments
along the marsh and they also build a
wetland Park in between our site and
lake so all over the stormwater coming
from our site will go through this
wetland be how it's get lead is to the
lake
and then so in 2004 IDO was acquired by
acorn but it kept operating as an
independent come form until 2009 and
then it became a con completely became a
con so that so that was kind of a
turning point where that kind of a
culture of the deformity shifted to
become really one of the a cons group
under the a con I became a design
partner at a con and then I actually led
a comprehensive team to design the
public space at the New York poetry
Center
elcome was also the prime consultants
for construction management because it
was a very very complex constructions so
so that's that's how the a con basically
was actually got into this project both
managing the construction as much as a
design in the public a public space so
we were responsible for design in all
the sidewalks in browser within the
district and also the river as well as a
Liberty Park which was built over the
security center for the particular
security center for the parking garage
but in 2013 I have decided to leave a
con and start my own firm to work on
selected number of project for a
selective number of clients I realize
that's where my passion is my passion
was to really focus on the project
not really about managing people
managing company so that's how I started
I'm gonna skip this because I know that
you talked about the MA and I think
everyone has a very clear idea of what
the Myers we are based in San Francisco
why because it is great place to live
great place to lay skills also meet
great friends great on collaborate
people cooperating people's so that's
where we based but the drawback is it's
very very expensive place to live so
this is how I started three desk six
years ago and we moving the biggest
space this is a actually a previous
office space we are now in the biggest
space but still remain as a boutique
beginning of this year we also open
office in Tokyo because we won a
competition in Doha in Japan so
basically our model is like this time
I'm doing a very differently from stores
where the project basically gave us
opportunity rather than letting the
passion that we do what we wanted to do
I'm its boss but now we have project
actually so that's actually much easier
this about 70% of our works in China as
you can see we have worked in many
different part of China 30% of workers
in Japan at this moment so we actually
have no work in you in the US I'm not
going to spend time today to talk about
her because it's very complicated but
it's intentional that we actually are
not working here
that means we travel often we love
seeing and exporting the site you know
we travel week we basically to see the
site to meet the clients why because we
believe that every project has a story
to tell and it's our job to discover
that story and that's our guiding
principle at of small so every project
is very very different and that's why we
need to be there I want to talk about a
few project 9 one of this is called
spawn City or the story is about a spawn
city I don't know how many of you
actually know the spawn city policy in
China but basically let me just give you
a quick background
it's basically well in 2009 there was a
first time in the history that the world
population is 50% or more than 50% of
the population maybe in the city so
urbanization czar happening quickly the
city was getting bigger so the city
become mega cities over 10 million
people most of them were actually
concentrated in Asia also the speed of
the growth of the city was actually
going very very fast this is a aerial
photo of Shanghai from 1986 to 2004 it's
and this is on 15 years ago so you can
imagine what I look like now
so what does that mean as a result we
you know we start seeing some of the
issue that we didn't have before and
most of them are actually dating to the
storm water or the water
the flooding basically increased area of
development means you know significant
less Lane water actually going down so
basically there's no nope no place for
water to go but at the same time it was
causing the drought as well so the China
Chinese government came up with this
policy in 2014 to approach this problem
more comprehensively and they basically
come up is they designated 30 model
cities and then come up is discernible
goals and then actually ask each to each
of the cities that actually come up is
approached to deal with these this
issues what's happening is that the lack
of experience expertise with the local
government to effectively actually this
point with this policy has been a big
issues a lot of project that we worked
on that these they understand this is a
policy but actual solution hasn't been
nearly developed what they don't know
what to do and often a lot of our sites
actually underground is filled with a
structure as a parking garage and thing
like that
so we really need to come so basically
what happened is that no one else is
solving except us so we are the one
actually have to kind of come up with
creative solutions and which actually is
opportunity for us because there is no
much degradation so yeah and then so for
us we can actually look at the site most
carefully and then come up with unique
solutions that's actually fit that
context specific context
and that's kind of a very different
approach than any other places like in
US or whether you know often there's are
more negations or guidelines and you
actually hold the guideline in China
that actually doesn't happen so we
actually look at it more site-specific
issues and then come up is that and it
you know it might not be efficient but
it's actually pretty realistic because
that's what the issues are on site so we
were we had a opportunity to work on
project within the Expo Expo or Beijing
actually I don't know how many people
knew but Beijing export just happen and
just ended actually a couple weeks ago
this summer there's a Beijing Expo and
we were invited to work on some of the
project so we did a project called smart
typography just to give you the context
that saw that yeah that was open from
April to October so we were asked to
work with one of the pavilion that was
built by only private sponsor of the
Expo it's a developer it's one of the
largest developer in China called Wonka
so we and I have work with them on many
other projects they have actually
invited us to work with them or that
what their pavilion
[Music]
the object was a bonus from Beijing and
we were responsible for interior garden
design concept rooftop garden concept
and site landscape design the card for
the entire site this was a very early
kind of diagram by architect so
basically what what they were trying to
create was actually inside is a
botanical gardens focusing on and this
plane
sorry I'm just spacing out let me just
keep going
yes Expo site which is about it's
calling Beijing by its about 75
kilometers ride of Beijing it's kind of
in the amount you know if you know
Beijing the Beijing surrounded by
mountains actually and that's where that
like great walls are so we our site is
big in the kind of the upland and when
you when we like when we are looking for
some inspirations and what we are trying
to do was looking at alarm basically we
wanted to air it show the importance of
the ground or the performance of the
topic ground or topography as a main way
to display the capacity of the site or
the landscape so you know when you look
at the landscape patterns for instance
it's often actually patterns are made by
human or the nature and when we look at
our site these are these or that
mountain near near our site you can see
that fog rafi start actually defining
how the nature respond so there's always
this kind of dialogue between the
topography and nature and human so we
wanted to actually play that kind of we
wanted to be involving that kind of a
dialogue so that's what that's how we
approach our projects just to give you a
quick background on the context so
climate conditions are in our site
there's a lane season between June and
September and about 50 centimeters of
our lane lane for in a year
and then and we also look at the site
conditions we were working closely with
that water engineer to actually
understand some of the constrain within
that site there's a very large labor run
actually next to our site and the
flooding is very very a big issues in
China in site like this because they
actually are basically transforming the
agricultural side into the some
developments for instance so a lot of
the lands that has under the flow inside
the floodplain so we need to actually
understand the water levels for the for
the flood levels and also we need to
come up is that our fraud in controlled
design criterias too
we also needed to understand the soil
conditions after doing the testing we
are we realize that our site has not
much it doesn't actually it's basically
our gray areas actually or covering the
entire site so if we were to come up
with a strategy to manage the stormwater
it's not so much about charging to the
underground right so it's mostly about
storing them and then also these
deciphering them so that was our
strategy based on the soil profile and
we also study the groundwater conditions
sorry this is in Japanese so basically
after the after for after understand all
the site site context we basically came
up with a stormwater strategies and then
goals so we our God who our project was
to actually start to ditch 70% of the
rain rain water to the cycle within our
site and also make sure that our site is
protected during the hundred year flood
plain
so this was our site basically they do
tell our new streets based on the
guideline but our site was about to meet
a lower than the in new new streets so
it was like kind of weird awkward
conditions to start with and then we
knew that they wanted to put the
building in the middle so they I have to
be above the flood plains so that's
where the buildings are there is a main
circulation for that within the expo
will be here and then there's entries
and exit for the pavilions so we created
a Plaza just almost like a bridge and
then created the space for people so we
created series of amphitheaters terraces
and balcony as an event space for people
so that's what he became and then we use
that this part of the site we introduced
a series of land form to collect the
storm water and then on the back of the
site what actually used to create a
wetland where we were storing the water
and then the dad decide the westerns are
part of the site we were actually using
it to saturate the snow motor so we
introduced a water gardens and rain
gardens so that's how we basically came
up with a structure of the site so once
we actually have the site framework we
start actually using the clay as a tool
to actually start looking at the dam
compositions and topography how can we
actually collect the stormwater so
creating the micro to kind of a
watershed and then creating that enough
enough negative space for the water to
actually store so the re re stage of the
design we mostly work on the crema doors
and once we actually have a cream of
those we scan them in to digitizer
models and we use this actually digital
digital model as a way to speak to our
water engineers so they can actually
take out our data and then actually
calculate the capacity or the storm
water our storage or that storage and
corrections so we try to simulate what
happens during in different events we
work very closely with water engineers
they came up with some some kind of a
simulations to make sure that our
landforms our topography is actually
smart enough to capture all of the
waters and store them
so this is kind this is kind of how it
works so you can I will show you how
that water actually like where the water
get captured and stored and what
happened once it's actually hit that
capacity start actually running down so
if you have a big events of Istanbul or
events the order of the water will go
down to the wetland and inste within the
hardscape we were draining all of the
water to the edge and also we are
capturing all that water from Duluth
rooftop and in storing them into the
underground tank and we basically all of
the water to actually get connected to
wetland any any waters actually
exceeding the capacity or that of the
Saturn the level will gets back to store
into that our water tank and in this
artery so this is how the system work
[Music]
and this is a complete system within our
site and it's very smart because what
happened is that PO graph we can
actually start defining basically
topography will create a microclimate
within our side so some slope is
actually sunny and dry some sites some
area is actually wet so that that start
actually defining our planting type
plantings basically so it's basically
that planting design is based on the
topography so that micro micro con micro
site conditions basically it's starting
to define what kind of plants the plant
and trees the plant so this is our
master plan this was during the
constructions its know a few times so we
can actually see more abstract forms in
landscape and this is how it's build we
are using a lot of precast concrete
papers in China because that's actually
more environmentally sensitive the stone
quarries actually are a lot of stone
quarry in China is actually getting shut
down by government because it's not
friendly so we are and that actually
give us more opportunity to work with
this kind of a custom paper or something
like that
so this area is actually for the for
people and events and then also that the
design idea for the paving is we
actually have the lines within the
paving these lines actually contours so
you can actually all of the lines that
we see in the paving is actually a
contour so people can actually
understand the stripe actually get
denser when it's actually a steeper
slope and we already wanted everyone to
understand this concept of contours so
that's why our detailing of like
terraces for instance actually we tried
to basically capture this kind of idea
of the elevations and contours and fog
Rafi
so this part is a lane guard our lane
gardens so that's where the water
getting saturated so that the water from
the underground power storage she would
actually pump to this lotus pond and
MIDI pond and it's get it's actually go
down through the lane gardens and go
down to to the wetland so that's our
story about the smart bog Rafi I don't
know I might out of the time yeah tip
point that's good keep going okay well I
have one more project to share that this
is a project about restorations this is
a story about destroying the
socio-economic gap that was created
between local farmers and new
communities in China we were asked to
come in to the development they said
this is a very large development with
inside outside of Hangzhou and what you
see is what you see in red is already
constructed oranges under construction
and yellow is actually under planning in
the Mount it's kind of a nice the baby
nice settings and then actually that
developer has come up with a lot of open
space networks and then trails in the
mountains and they have done a lot of
thinking about beyond just that
developing mode you know they they want
to make sure that there's a cultural
components to it as an environmental
aspect to it they have their own
deciding centers within the communities
they have actually they came up with
they have brief you live in this
community you have your own the ecard
you actually shop by using the card and
that actually allowed them to understand
how much actually is getting what but is
getting purchased and when hunting like
that so they're trying to actually
minimize a waste so they are the dis
developers are very sensitive to
this car they were there trying to do
something new and not be responsive but
at the same time when they were actually
building the new development new
community there was an old stone quarry
right next to it which became the
agricultural land actually the
government basically transfer basically
and so on this other agriculture of
farmland so developer but was basically
nervous about having their farmers are
farming right next to their developments
because that was a kind of the
socio-economic gap and they they they
felt like new legends won't feel
comfortable or won't be attractive to
these communities so they asked us to
come into the site because they were
basically going to plant the forest as a
buffer but they came they asked us to
come in and take a look just to see what
is there anything else they can do so we
went to the site and we start looking at
the site and you know there are some
really beautiful kind of elements that
farm us that buildings in order to
actually create the allah allowed them
to do the farming's so we start thinking
well why why is this such a big issue
this is a view and this could be a
beautiful landscape behind your
community so we need to think about
telling the story we need to actually
make that connections between the
connect this actually are conflicting
our topics so we basically start talking
about what is the biggest concern right
now in China which is the food safety is
a biggest biggest concern in China right
now they don't know where the food is
coming from so so we basically said you
know maybe this is a great solution for
to address these food safety issues and
concerns
and we also look at the how that as the
income level of China has changed in
last 20 years and how that actually
affecting where people live and how
people live behold
you know period of parents and
grandparents and kids used to live
together and what happened was you know
young parents moving into City and
that's how they make money and they
actually most of the money they actually
made in the city they actually shipped
sent back to the villages and beyond
where the grandparents actually keep
their grandchildren that's how it used
to be but now the income level actually
went up in after only one of the parents
need to work they don't need to both
need both of them don't need to work
anymore so they can't abuse their
children or child so that kind of such
shift in the family structures and then
there has more free time because behold
when when two of them are working in the
city they didn't even have time to cook
now they have more time to be to
actually do cooking in at hardhome
feeding their kids but at the same time
they kind of lost the idea of having the
dinner at night at home they always went
out so we wanted to actually kind of
bring all of this kind of disconnect or
lost cultures or impact into this
community so basically what the story we
came up is like let's celebrate having
the farm farmland behind your community
there are some beautiful things actually
in within the farming
but also we want we actually introduced
this idea of food education so that let
them participate in part of the farming
so they actually start learning like
what's actually what Pro what produce
actually you know what what what [ __ ]
doubles up to where they come from when
that event actually is the best time to
eat so we really wanted to use this as a
way to rediscover that this food culture
in China so at the end of the one week
workshop we came up with very quick
diagrams actually transforming this site
as a new open space to really reconnect
these missed connections
some of the site we we are key we were
keeping as agricultural field and we
were also bringing in community in to
create to make the some of the part of
that farming as a community community
gardens and then some of the trusses we
were proposing to actually create a tea
tea tea roses because Hangzhou is non
haughty gardens and then take some of
the quarry site kind of leftover site
within the mountains and actually make
the gallery or museum where they can
actually explore
so that was very quick brainstorming
workshop that we did which the clients
agreed that's actually the way to do it
so we basically created a project who
our own and that's how it got started we
spend a lot of time on site because
that's all that's where our passion is
to really build projects but that means
we have to spend a lot of time on site
early working through the detail with
contractor inside taking cue from some
of the way the farmers build walls we
kind of really introduced some of those
those vocabulary into our landscape
and creating some community space
[Music]
so this is what the beauty product is
look like
so for instance this kind of terroristic
will be used as a place for the
community to come and then they will
pick up their their produce basically
the idea we had actually another idea we
had was how the developer actually
create management company for the
farmers and then so the farmers can so
that nearby legends can actually
subscribe to their produce that was
actually was basically grown grown on
this farm so that would actually
stabilize the income of the farmers as
well so that's that that kind of
management strategy as well this is a
playground for the communities and then
open space for the community Teeter says
and this is the entry from the community
to that to the park so that's it that's
it for tonight thank you so much
[Applause]
this site is actually owned by
government but the developer will manage
it
local local level yeah basically all of
the land in China is owned by government
and developer will basically have a
lease to develop it so residential
development is 80 years and they think
they can be new to lease that hasn't
been done yet
historically that they have a [ __ ] so
everyone buying the residential
development they think they can renew
the lease after eight years
yeah it's basically that they mean great
things about China is everything's moves
so fast right so it's things can change
or the the whole momentum actually get
built up so quickly but at the same time
there's not enough resource to execute
them or that you know engaging the
momentum and execute a walk so a lot of
project just kind of get built without
really actually dealing with the actual
issues sometime they would actually put
the permeable paving over the cars
parking structures and be like where's
the water going like no no one knows
what happened but the government
government people would actually come
and check and say are you using
permeable paving and that's okay so
those are kind of what's happening
that's why that's why some of us are
trying to really deal with the actual
issues and trying to solve it but they
asked I mean I would say a lot of a lot
of project do get built without just
more of the surface kind of things
yeah
right
they do I think I think the larger
there's definitely opportunity to
actually approach it more in a
systematic much larger broad stroke I
think and that might be something to do
something more for like we just want to
project the image engine it's a very
large open stop parks
Park actually and one of the thing that
we're actually proposing is that the
park actually be a part of the green
infrastructures so we're designing the
wetland within our park to actually and
then with asking the government to bring
in all of the stormwater into our Park
basically because we know that they are
not dealing with it in the development
but if if there's enough over you know
enough bigger enough of the open space
it's probably much more effective way to
actually deal with these issues so so
things like that I think it can be done
and I think it's body it's much more
effective
yeah
the farmers are actually dicen from that
government yeah and basically the way
that we are proposing is to actually
have the developer home iliza company
the management company for the farmers
so some of the community can actually
lend some of the garden space from the
farmers actually yes we just trying to
stabilize the farmers income their bows
and things like that as a way as a way
to like fill in the gap of that you know
existing gap
[Music]
do you know
well we for this specific project we've
done we know how much water's actually
comes from our own Park and this project
is an innovation of the existing park an
existing Park has a very large body of
water which doesn't have enough water to
keep keep the water body so there's a
lot of project in Japan in China where
someone had a big idea of let's put a
lake like a huge leg but they don't know
where the water is coming from so that's
one of our issues actually and then the
competition requirements were to keep
these what water body and then when we
went to the site there's no water so
it's like what water what do we need
your key then we realize okay there is
actually they when they when we look at
a plan it's actually designated as a
lake so then we work with water
engineers and calculated to see if we
can maximize the catchment within our
side and we realize that sport is not
going to be enough so that's why we
actually expanded the watershed study to
see if we were to bring in because
there's watershed right so can we
actually capture capture how much so
that that can be designed and that can
be actually control the biggest
challenge right now is Verity it's
happening so fast so we have to figure
out who are who we need to talk to how
we really going to get that done the
idea they are interested in but how to
how to how to reconnect how to actually
bring in those waters actually is that
is that actually challenge for us no but
can be done
yeah
uh-huh
yeah
very
well I don't I hope it did I hope
there's no one from me a cone here well
I think at the a con we I mean who me
even when I was at a con I had a very
small group within a con so I was
basically working almost like a small
studio within a account so that was that
was easy in a way because I just kind of
changed the platform from big platform
to and basically the weatherized kind of
started off small was basically clients
noticing that how we work and they
basically said the next project why
don't you just take it why do you need a
con so that's how I started so of course
a comb can bring like so the project I
was working on was a very simple
compared to what a con might be every
day of course there is a benefit for
hiring company like a con for very
complex mega project but some of the
project I was doing or I was interested
in was much simpler in a way the issues
issues might be complex but that design
solution in the project itself I didn't
need 50,000 people working on my project
I needed only 10 people working on
projects so so that wasn't yeah so in
terms of transition from akin to what we
do now I think it's very simple we're
still working with the same clients they
basically came to us
what they asked us to open move out of a
econ basically but yeah that Hargreaves
definitely has a very strong influence
on what we do stores like that our
Beijing project office my project is
basically the project I show you the
pom-pom in ground that we were doing the
speculative project that kind of is
definitely has a very similar kind of
quality to it I think that what I did at
GSD has a very very important influence
on what I deal now but yeah I don't know
if I answered a question yeah
sorry Sagan
right yeah
well I go there I mean I travel party
once a month there and when I go there I
try to hit as many this project as
possible I mean yes I love to spin sight
on time on site but he knows how often
do you have to go do that it's the same
same thing so and in during the
construction I actually have other teams
also doing them visit as well so but
also I think sometimes it's actually
better to not live where the project is
because you can always bring in a fresh
eye I think Joe Brown I think used to
say you do the best project not in your
hometown but somewhere else because you
actually bring in fresh you see these
things differently I think and I think
that's partly true
thank you
[Applause]
