good evening my name is Katie Jenkins
I'm an assistant professor of landscape
architecture and this semester I have
the good fortune to be coordinating the
glimpse or seminar with tonight's
speaker with the generous support of
herb and DeeDee glimmer this
professorship invites a critical voice
from landscape architectural practice to
engage with students and faculty at the
Milton school tonight I am delighted to
introduce this year's glimpse our
distinguished visiting professor Mick
young kin Mick young asserts that her
work is not art but firmly
representative of landscape
architectural practice yet one can infer
upon looking at her work why it might be
necessary to make such an assertion her
design landscapes offer immersive
multi-sensory experiences but they are
also civic spaces and ecological filters
sites of communal engagement and
sanctuaries for reflection and healing
the complex visual rhythms that make
Mick Young's landscapes pulse are to be
certain a product of the diverse
artistic media that saturate her process
indeed Mick young possesses fluency
across a range of modes of artistic
expression her background in music and
sculpture is evident in the way that she
deploys melodic and aesthetic language
to her descriptions of landscape through
her process of translation these lyrical
undertones become spatial sequences of
light and color steel and stone
it is this assimilation of influences
that for me locates her work at the apex
of landscape architectural practice it
is a further testament to her commitment
to sight that her built projects do not
retain the typical signatures that so
often punctuate the work of designers
regardless of that works context rather
she gives voice to the site and the
materials used to augment it in her
conversations with students here at OSU
she has given insight into a process
that precludes the possibility of
repeating herself with every project the
site is changed the conditions are
changed and she has changed none of this
can be easy and yet this year alone her
firm has been awarded the prestigious
cooper-hewitt National Design Award and
the American Society of landscape
architects national design Medal my
students have remarked that although the
work they are undertaking the semester
with Vic young is demanding it is
simultaneously restorative a reprieve
from other obligations learning from
Mick Young is much like discovering her
landscapes it generates energy nourishes
the imagination and leaves one eager for
further encounters so please join me in
welcoming the kyung kim thank you very
much I hear he's thank you Katie for the
lovely introduction to dort a for
inviting me I've I've already been here
once and met some really great students
did some workshops
I was when I hear these introductions I
was I think who is that person I'd like
to meet them
we're so honored to be here and thank
you to Milton school for inviting us I
my background is both in design and
music and I think it does shape the work
that we do as an office I wanted to just
start off with a kind of caveat because
I think there is this myth about the
kind of designer the kind of top-down
sketch on the napkin
you know designer that doesn't look like
me you know they're usually a little bit
taller and they're and I think what the
work that I'm going to share today I
wanted just to kind of frame it is that
it is it emerges out of a kind of a
larger collaborative discussion
what's collaboration because that's a
word like that IBM use isn't everything
I think it it means that it's it's a
larger group of people I'm here today
but there is a group of people within my
office and then a group of people who
are part of a larger team who make these
projects possible so the bigger the
project that I show you today the more
likely that my part is in is a kind of
I've been calling it a tapestry over the
last year but I think it's that
something that's more active it's more
like today I was thinking as we were
doing crits this afternoon that's more
like a dance it's like working with
other people so what does collaboration
mean it's sort of like dancing with a
lot of people I'm not a very good dancer
but I'm a good collaborator so so that's
you know I think I come from a
background that is more unconventional I
didn't study design and my undergrad
degree but I think that it's
the vision that we have together in our
office what I wanted to do tonight was I
selected a few projects that talked
about because some of you may be
graduating some of you will be all of
you will be entering the the world of
practice and in our office there's a way
in which we don't we don't have a kind
of singular style that that defines the
brand of the firm but also that
concurrently we're working on multiple
scales and often really contrasting
scales and it's becoming more and more
contrasting as as we grow as an office
so now we're working on a project that's
tableware for Swarovski crystals and
then on the other end of the spectrum a
385 acre master plan in Morocco and so
those two drawings and they're kind of
insistence sit at our table and I wanted
to share with you how we work and how
how it kind of it's it's like a fractal
you know that the work that each work
has a dialogue with each other and that
the kind of variety of scales I think is
very important for designers whether
you're an architect landscape architect
or an interior designer so to start I've
kind of frame these and these are the
first three projects one is in Korea and
I think that's the mark of another
that's unique I think to the practice
now is that we do work all around the
world and so it's requires a lot of
listening and learning and understanding
what it means to make a place so I've
selected kind of one kind of urban Civic
Plaza one smaller garden and one larger
7.5 mile River restoration project all
that happened in the same time period
so this is in downtown Seoul in South
Korea and Korea's been in the news a
great deal and you know it's a it's a
major city it's one of the largest urban
centers in the world and in Southeast
Asia and what we did was our work is
about kind of bringing together all
these different conditions so it's
understanding I don't know if my eyes
are a little blurry so will blurry to
you guys it's a little blurry so so
every project that we work on in
landscape architecture has this kind of
component of understanding what the
systems of the site are and in in South
Korea it's all about water so if you're
there in August this could be happening
but it's not just in South Korea right
it's there's a hurricane Florence we're
doing a botanic garden in
Charlottesville it's is this idea of
where does water go and so that was
question number one in this project is
there's a resiliency problem in the
middle of downtown Seoul what do we do
about it
so just to give you a little context
this is North Korea
this is South Korea this is a night view
when you fly over from the u.s. to Korea
you can see this kind of delineation and
our site is here we we were awarded this
project that as part of an international
competition and it's the source point of
this seven and a half mile River which
feeds into the Han River so it's a it's
a green corridor in the middle of the
city
just a zoom in so the the piece of the
project that we do up and we designed in
the competition is two major city blocks
they call them super blocks in South
Korea in downtown Seoul and it's their
financial district but just to go
through in the early twentieth century
this is a country that went through
because geographically where it's
located it's you know it was a war-torn
city and just as a testament to this
country they were within from that
period of time to today be able to
transform this country in South Korea so
this tiny little country got divided
into two tiny little countries and then
South Korea became I think it's like the
sixth largest economy in in Asia and
[Music]
Seoul is a very busy city but this is
actually a historic photo so I wanted to
the the lecture should have been called
like the kitchen sink because it's gonna
have lots of different things in it
because I feel like I wanted to share
with you a little bit of like our dirty
underwear or no
that came out wrong um sorry that's not
happening tonight just to show you a
little bit of our process okay so one of
the things we do is we go to a place and
we do a lot of historical analysis we
don't talk about it much at these
lectures but in order to have to feel
that we have the right to work in
Morocco and Korea and Hong Kong and
Charlottesville we have to get to know
the place some of it is research some of
it is spending time with people so these
are some this is the Cheung gay River
and these are historical photos during
the war so this is a river that
historically the reason why Seoul was
placed there was because of this natural
stream and for you know 454 to 5,500
years just urban effluence flowed
directly into this river and so it
became a shanty town during the war and
then they covered it like how they did
in many cities they covered it with a
highway so this is a picture in the 1968
of them building kind of this vision of
like they did this in Boston to this
vision of like progress in the city so
they built this highway that basically
divided the city in half so this is an
image of the river and the source point
of the river and the difference of some
of the diagrams that we did we did
essentially this is a green
infrastructure all part but it also
accommodates about 22,000 tons of
surficial runoff on average every day so
collects runoff from the subway systems
and from the city itself so it's
essentially this area is like this
glorified storm water basin
I've forgotten what the statistic is but
there are a lot of people living so it's
like I knew I remember I just remembered
per square meter
there's 17 on average seventeen thousand
six hundred people per square meter in
Korea that's including like wherever
you're standing all the stuff that's
happening below so it's like six times
denser than New York City so it's a lot
of people and these are just some images
of the process so just in terms of
construction in in Boston this project
would have taken three decades to build
and in Korea in South Korea it took five
years that doesn't include design time
but construction so this was the first
project where I learned that landscape
has the capacity to have a political
voice because the mayor at that time
who's who this was his baby this was his
idea he eventually went on to become
president I'm not taking credit for his
success but so you can see this is the
highway that basically bisects the city
and they basically dismantle the entire
highway and then reinstall this so this
project had a lot of impact it and all
landscapes have that capacity
particularly in the city there's a
social impact and I'm not going to bore
you by reading this but just basically
there's a kind of cultural impact that
these projects can have and the idea of
this project is that it's a it's a kind
of canvas or a foundation by which
people can lay their own programming and
cultural aspirations
I think that's like Buddha's birthday or
something so a lot of the pictures I'm
going to show you about this from this
project are not pictures we photograph
they're not staged but they're from like
Instagram and other social media there's
there was a huge environmental impact of
improving air quality reducing the kind
of heat island effect and then bringing
in about 230 different species of birds
and flora and fauna and then it makes
money you know and that's it sounds a
little crass I know but it's it's an
important component to these public
spaces because without that kind of
revenue generation that's the space dies
you need some kind of interface between
the two and so within this project there
was basically it spurred all of this
development when we looked at the
project you know they we got this plan
which said okay here's the river but we
started saying well the river still
disconnects one part of the city from
the other so we were part of a much
larger discussion which included their
Army Corps of Engineers a slew of local
landscape architects and architects and
understanding how we could start to
reconnect neighborhoods together this
was a very important project and so
within this diagram this wasn't our idea
but it was part of the project and I
want to share it with you was to bring
back the kind of some of the historic
pedestrian bridges and also to make the
zone a pedestrian zone so it got
transformed from a highway to a kind of
pedestrian zone which had these historic
some which were actually histo
the the literal historic stones and
others which were weary fabrications I
think there's a real desire in South
Korea to bring back - to bring back some
of the rituals that made their culture
vibrant and so this was a first step so
this is a underneath the bridge walking
underneath and so just want to show you
you know we always show these glossy
photos of what the project is and and
all the practice I'm going to show today
I wanted to show a little bit of our
process and so one of the big ideas that
won us the competition was that there
are nine provinces in North and South
Korea and we were proposing to have the
nine provinces donate stones from their
quarries so there'd be nine provinces
nine stones week left the stones then
there'd be nine source points nine so
each one of these so the symbol is that
the source point of the River is a kind
of symbol of the reunification of these
two countries three years ago when I
used to give this lecture and talk about
this project I would I said it's a long
way off from 1985 when the two countries
marched together
in the Olympics who knows who knows what
could happen next but they they do talk
about how when the two countries reunify
that they will celebrate it at the
source point we build a lot of physical
models really old-fashioned really fast
and helps and it's a very good
collaborative tool so this is that air
dry clay means that when you're working
on it together we put saran wrap on top
of it
we can move things around while we're
working together everybody knows how to
move clay around so as we're working on
this we're also developing renderings
and this is showing at different levels
how this sunken source point actually
fills up so these are the the stones and
these are the different source points of
the different provinces you know it's
really strange right you see these like
drunks and then you're like tada here it
is
but it's it's you know it's I've been
reading this biography of Louis Kahn and
he calls it a grind and it is it's a
it's like not magic it is it's this
process and you have to be persistent so
it's this process of going from that
drawing to this and so it was this and
it's become this and in August it
becomes that so a lot of people have
asked me I'm gonna go back oh no I'm not
going back sorry
I'll show I'll point it to you later
remind me if I don't but look at these
walls and this stair a lot of people say
well why did you think that why don't
you bring to grade remember I was
talking about that kind of glorified
Basin this is this this is - after storm
and these are some pictures from online
during the storm how this place and so
when we first designed this we wanted
all this plant material in there and and
just imagine a couple times a year this
happens just fills up and so the
engineer is basically well I flew to
Korea because I was younger and more
stubborn and I said you got to have some
plant material in here and we've got to
do this and have some life and got to
give it life and I lost so we redesigned
it to be more with stone work and the
first year the one of the Army Corps of
Engineers he sent me this image is like
see but on an everyday basis what I have
seen people do is when they're walking
to work let's say they usually come from
here they'll come down off the street so
unless the opposite of the High Line and
then they'll go into this more cooler
environment and they come up to wherever
they're working so they'll come off of
the street but it's a for Korea this is
a huge commitment for us it seems like
just this a little sliver but if you
just imagine each meter has seventeen
thousand six hundred people in it this
is a big commitment for the city you
know
and it's a very highly used space they
have festivals here and lots of
different kinds of activities it's also
in the summertime a beach
I love this kid right
can't you just feel how great that feels
and then just this is the high level mid
level and so the whole design yeah like
it's kind of scary how many people are
are going into the water but it's the
water was brought to a class two level
safe for people to to hang out so for a
hundred years or hundreds of years this
was a river that was dangerous to engage
with and so it's a place where a lot of
different things are happening
and so the design is essentially you can
see from this side that we really
simplified it and it's basically taking
the pathway of just bending it down and
creating these ramps that take you to
the water really simple idea bring you
to the water with stone that was donated
by North and South Korea to create this
very powerful symbol this is a photo I
found online it's like two kids
boogie-boarding so cute and so what
happens from the source point as it
moves out it becomes more and more
planted more and more there's a
diversity of experiences and that's
because it's not in the heart of the
city where there's kind of store where
they have to manage those kind of
intensive storms this is blurry too this
is a place I believe that Civic space is
still should be a place where the
Democratic voice is heard and so this is
a place where when there was an outbreak
of mad cow disease people came and they
didn't want to buy our beef because it
was the outbreak was here
and then it's a place of joy it's a
place where art installations can happen
we celebrate Buddha's birthday you and
then from the upper level looking down
and you know another really adorable kid
I should just like fill these with
puppies and shut because pictures of
puppies and then this is a million they
call it a million man but I'm sure
there's some women and there are a
million person March when there was a
scandal you may have read about in the
paper the president what a year and a
half ago stepped down because she was
getting bad advice from strange people
or something and so this is the chunk a
river and it's a it fits a lot of people
so that's a big project
lots of people making a big impact but I
think you can I believe that you make a
big impact in many different ways as a
designer so I wanted to show you two
other projects not just to show about
talk about the impact but also to talk
about how in our office with the group
of people that we work with they we
don't things look different from each
other it's not very academic is it that
there's a responsiveness that we have to
each place and I want to show you that
during this five year period when we
were designing jeongae we were also
designing this project which is which is
in downtown Chapel Hill and so we did a
master plan and a streetscape studying
the two major streets that take you to
UNC and really just study you can see in
the light green we started saying okay
there's some missing teeth that we want
a link between the kind of existing
parks and so this was the first project
that was built they found a developer
and we were actually asked to come on as
both the Landscape Architect and the
public artist for this project so when
we started this project well it didn't
look like this we started but when we
started this project we we we you know
we were doing community meetings we're
sitting and we heard these engineers in
the corner wringing their hands about
stormwater and where are we gonna put it
we're gonna lose some parking spaces if
we if we have to put a big tank below
grade and so I kind of moved my chair
over to their table and I said you know
I'm really interested in this
conversation and a couple weeks later we
started saying why don't we use that
storm water we could cleanse it
and then we could create and then if
you've ever been to Chapel Hill in this
summer it's hot there and so our idea
was to create this kind of mist fountain
sculptural fountain and so it's these
are some of the this is a physical model
that we made it's like folded mylar and
then a RINO model we made concurrently
so there's like a lot of different
things happening at the same time kind
of informing each other we like to use a
lot of Technology I can remember that
word we like to use the kind of latest
technology and responsive technology so
this is one where we started thinking
like it's like as if the whole site is
exhaling water and so we thought what if
this is like a lung and it's actually
breathing mist in and out so that the
the mist of the light actually moves
back and forth through this sculpture
and we do a lot of mock-ups
so this is our grasshopper model and
then some full-scale mock-ups just
studying how the folding pattern works
how the perforation patter works so this
is metal and we designed the paving
pattern so that it's almost like rain
droplets that are moving away from the
central sculpture
and it's a great amenity for for the
town and for students very theatrical
but when there's no water and they they
do have droughts there there's no
fountain this is another very cute kid I
always feel sorry for him in this
picture because it looks like he's like
walking into the pit of hell or
something like that sorry
and he's so like look at how his hands
are behind his back is like a 60-year
old soul inside of a three year old body
but we love to make places that that do
this you saw that in the first project
where like a father and daughter come
and they're like discovering something
you know I think that's it's not us
telling didactically this is what should
happen here but to Frank to kind of let
people discover that so the third
project within that so that was
stainless steel this is a private
residence and we don't do very many of
them but this client was a very unique
client we when they called us we told
them we don't do residential work and we
gave them two other names of other firms
that do it one of them was Michael Dwyer
and so so he the client then it was sort
of like he thought I was playing hard to
get but I wasn't it was just like we we
don't really do it and so he came to our
office and he was supposed to meet
Michael after us so I had recommended a
friend of mine and then he the clients
like you're hired
which is like the only time that's ever
happened to us but you're hired on the
spot and he cancelled the interview with
monk I think we're still friends though
so this is the main house designed by
Schwartz silver and this is in Lincoln
Massachusetts very beautiful bucolic
suburb of Boston and this is where for
this is for our pond for our pond is one
of the ponds that links to Walden Pond
and you may have Thoreau it's a very
historic neighborhood so just pay
attention to this red line the site is
four acres and we designed the whole
area I think the rule so this is the
site the view from the house it's an
incredible site it's got hardwood
forests that frame the site but the site
itself this whole area was raised when
we came to the site and so just to show
you a little glimpse of how we do
planting plans we never do one planting
plan we think about them seasonally so
early spring spring for me early spring
is really important I think like that
March moment where the kind of tulips
come up it's just an amazing moment so
summer and then fall so this is all the
same so you could see here's that red
line again and just thinking about the
kind of tapestry of the landscape and
the kind of colors that will transform
this is me yelling at the contractor now
and again making physical models so this
project started so that red line is is
this fence it started off as a one
layered flat fence and welded and as we
started working on it we started
thinking would it be interesting if it
moved that was like a year and a half
later that's the great thing about
residential work is that you just you
can keep working if you have a good
client so these are some physical models
that actually move and in fact we made
these first because if if anyone were to
tell you that we drew this plan first
they would be lying right this is the
plan of the fence this is the section
and we built it in Rhino and an axon so
we're not a big fan of plans because I
think that complexity gets lost if
that's all you rely on so it's one two
three four five six layers of Courtin
and so this was I want to show you a
little process like we had the idea and
then we this was before we thought about
having it move I dug it up yesterday
it's we thought oh what if it had like
lay you know two layers and we welded it
together and it was impossible to build
you can see like you can't weld this to
that you know like everyone quit
and then this well remember this this is
a fence this is a gate that we designed
but a lot of the fence we had to kind of
build it in Rhino then build a mock-up
to make sure it worked and then we then
we built it for real so it was like an
arts project you know it's like really
hands-on sculptural so the way it was
built was that it it came all scrunched
up like this there are six different
sizes of this solid core ten bar and
they're bolted together and you can see
this crane and we regraded the site so
that it brought back the kind of natural
came in cattle landscape of this
beautiful site and then essentially the
crane lifts and opens this up and we
pour the footings as we're installing
the so it was really it fits the land
like a glove but the shape of it is
defined by the land so this is the fence
and so you can see that the fence has a
kind of varied opening but the minimum
opening is actually the
shoulder-to-shoulder dimension of their
two dogs this is like what you can get
when you're very very rich
it's their German Shepherds Lesko and a
camera and burlesque O's friend's name
but I'm literally on the ground
measuring this dogs shoulder-to-shoulder
and that's why we don't do that much
residential work but so this this
opening is based on on them and so the
first the first weekend they invited us
to dinner and they were dog sitting a
miniature dachshund and it just like
went right through the fence is like so
we're like come on penny so basically
the fence is this kind of it's a court
and so it's this reddish tone in the
summer it's has a beautiful relationship
with the landscape and then the fall you
can see in these photos it starts to
really merge and blend in with the
landscape and this is their front door
so the only rule they had for us is no
lawn they wanted no lawn and so
everything is this kind of nut there's
no impervious surfaces so this is a
project about water as well this is
their front door and that fence weaves
through many different kinds of
landscapes
so you can see from above its it changes
dimension but it's five or six layers
the that white mock-up that you saw
earlier
that's a gate that's located here after
the fact when we built it the client
said you know we were sort of trapped in
here sort of like how you guys are
trapped in here right great didn't you
say they can't leave so I could talk
about anything can't leave and so
basically they said I said well you know
it's gonna Mar it if you have a if you
have a gate and so they're like we don't
care just put it in even if you can't
say so now to find the gate you have to
come and it's so heavy because it's
solid core ten but one of my favorite
projects and it goes through all these
different kinds of landscapes and then
in the winter it becomes the star you
know this is the view from their kitchen
yeah the overhead view you saw earlier
the view from their bedroom so so two
projects that we did concurrently about
nine years ago and I want to show you
the kind of contrast and relationship
they're both in Chicago one is a Chicago
Botanic Garden the other one is called
the crown sky garden at the Robert H
lurie Children's Hospital and so we do a
lot of research and work on restorative
design human centered design design that
brings about well-being it's that that's
a big piece of all the work that we do
within three to five minutes it has been
through psychological studies it's now
been shown that within the hospital
setting
patience their bodies are normalized
when they have when they are able to
engage a landscape but even when they
are in a room where they're a windowless
room if you give them a painting of a
landscape they're their blood pressure
normalizes the brain circuitry circuitry
and their brain normalizes blood
pressure everything and so there's a way
in which we kind of fell into this
because because we do sculptural work
and we're interested in landscape a lot
of these gardens that's not it a lot of
these gardens are inside and so you
cannot use the standard tools design
these because a lot of these patients
are quite fragile
so both of these projects talk about
kind of the human brain and trying to
create a place for particularly families
but children to to kind of enhance the
brain to restore the brain function so
this is in Chicago the Chicago Botanic
Garden if you've never been to the
Chicago Botanic Garden is one of the
most beautiful places in the world and
you should go visit we designed a
Learning Center that's six and a half
acres and it is it's got a classroom and
central learning space Aquatic Center
kitchen garden and then a play space and
so that that's kind of the diagram of
the project and we looked at the master
plan and how this links to the larger
park to the larger garden
and just starting to diagram like how do
people move through you know this is a
very important part of our process to
understand where things are and how
things are programmed and so this is a
perspective view there are many
components to the garden but the big
idea of this garden is to create a place
for kids and families to come and put
aside a lot of their digital play tools
play things so that they can actually
discover the natural world I am a big
advocate of playgrounds that don't look
like playgrounds I think when it looks
like a playground the kids get bored
very very quickly and I don't blame them
when we predetermine what play is so
there are a series of these mounds that
are inspired by the kind of land
formations that you find in the Midwest
and so that that was part of a kind of
teaching moment a lot of these but and
both these projects I'm going to talk
about there are there are materials that
we went and looked for and so these
stones we actually we had a local
partner who helped us locate these
stones and so they're scattered
throughout the garden as a kind of place
to play as well
but the the the slopes of these are
really really steep some of them are
actually two to one so those of you know
grading it's like 50% so this is this
was finished last year a lot of people
say this is like me and my son but I
don't have long hair
we took some of the trees that we had to
take down from the site and we basically
carved them and created these kind of
nature play elements so there's a lot
about this about our work that's
inspired by the place you know we're
really flexible we see something we're
like oh you know what let's replace this
with this other this is beautiful wood
let's do that instead and there's just
there's a way in which we're
collaborating with the site and and the
people who who work there who live there
there's a natural stream in the site and
it's fed by them the lake so it's a kind
of circulation system we try and never
to make fountains that are like there's
a tank below grade and you know we try
to make it as part of the system and so
this land form piece actually becomes an
amphitheater and there's like an ad a
access point that that I'm showing you
the brain again the other aspect of the
Chicago Botanic Garden is I do believe
that it's really important to give
children an opportunity to to imagine I
think it's so important and and there is
a lot of research out there that shows
the importance of making those synaptic
connections when you're very young so if
you give children these playgrounds that
are completely predetermined I think
that there is actually actual damage
that happens
this is in the middle of downtown
Chicago it is along them Miracle Mile
and it's a brand new vertical hospital
that they built so this is a slide that
just shows you the different the
different processes we use to study this
project this is a pastel sketch that I
did really studying the way in which
some of these walls would be laminated
or Rhino model and essentially this
because it was on the 11th floor of a
build of the building and the interior
completely enclosed it it had a lot of
restrictions like we couldn't use stone
because stone is a it actually holds a
lot of infectious bacteria issues and so
we had to find a material that was hard
enough that could be cleaned easily so
we found a fabricator in Los Angeles who
used eco resin and it's recycled resin
and each piece is actually cast
individually so each piece is different
we do a lot of these multi-sensory
studies so this was a drawing that we
did very very early on it was before we
actually even drew up the plan but it
was just thinking like you have this
rectangular plot how do you start to
kind of expand the area so that there
could be multiple gardens with different
kinds of sensor or since sensory
experiences
so through the programming we designated
this is the main performance area and a
series of kind of contemplative spaces
around it I wanted to share with you
part of our process we I don't know if
you can see these little figures but we
were trying to find ways of doing these
renderings so these renderings weren't
done in Rhino or anything we actually
took snapshots of a physical model that
we built and then we took photographs of
these kind of little model figures
they're kind of from Germany they're
hand-painted and we photographed them
because they actually showed people
doing real things and we wanted to
express that so a mother breastfeeding
people who are of different sizes you
know I think it was something we wanted
to try to capture so this is the project
and these are so what what this kind of
double layered wall allowed for us to do
was to embed all the technology into it
so one thing that they didn't want is
for kids to touch anything because
that's where the trends transmission of
germs happen so there's actually a
sensor up here to cut off that sense of
speed and so basically depending on how
much activities happening here it
actually changes the kind of imagery of
the LED screen behind this on the 12th
floor there's a tree house and it's for
the most fragile patients so you reserve
time to go in here and it's completely
enclosed but you can actually look down
so it's actually right up here and you
can look down into the garden
this was the mote you never know when
you're doing a design what's the most
controversial part of the project this
was it we originally had a larger glass
floor there's a history of that in
Chicago to kind of go up and look down
the glass floor the wreaths I can't tell
you I was there probably I probably
spent 40 billable hours on the subject
of if this is not frosted because if
it's frosted you can you can't look down
right so if it's clear there was this
whole discussion about young girls and
dresses standing up here and then men
who shouldn't be down there or not just
men it just people down there looking up
and so it was you know that's part of
the process of executing a design is
getting people together talking about it
and making compromises so it went from
being something that fill this whole
area to half the area we had open water
because we thought it would be nice to
hear water
but during them when we finished
construction documents a case of
Legionnaires disease there was an
outbreak of that in a hospital Texas and
they blamed it on a fountain so the way
we responded was we made this bubbler
system but we filled it with marbles and
I personally showed the contractor I
think this might have been my template
right here
how to gradate it from blue to red
so I wanted to share with you a piece of
this project which is part of a lot of
our projects is like what does community
process mean and it's not just like
meeting people a few times and having
them put some stickers on a board but we
try to really get to know people and so
this is that marble wall so we wanted to
kind of talk they had a family advisory
board this young lady she started with
us when she was like 8 years old and by
the time we did the ribbon-cutting
ceremony she was attending nursing
school but when we first met her she had
not yet left the hospital ever in her
life this is a really meaningful work
for us this is a picture of us working
not just with the community that in the
hospital but with local craftsmen and so
we wanted to create these kind of
sensory elements with kids hands and so
what I did was I said okay let's put out
an ad to the to the existing Children's
Hospital in Chicago and say Mickey and
kim design is coming into town and we
would like we are going to be casting
kids hands and those bronze cast will be
going into the garden and I had planned
on being there for three days because we
weren't sure we'd get enough people and
when I arrived there was a line going
around the hall and there were all these
people and so we started off I had this
idea vision like I wanted little tiny
hands like baby hands and then teenager
hands in a variety and so we started
with the baby hands and when the
fabricator asked us like how detailed do
you want to get with these hands how
much of the the texture of the hands you
want to get and I said well as text as
detailed as you can get and he said well
it'll be this this kind of I don't know
this kind of material that you have to
hold your hands still for like at least
two and a half minutes so as it great
we'll do it
and so there was a line of of young
children in these kind of carriages like
a caravan with their mothers and
sometimes fathers waiting so we started
the youngest and there are these little
babies and they're so cute they have
that like an EEG on their head and we
said okay let's get started so we put
their hand into this cold jelly and
they're like haha and they're like holy
 oh sorry to say that they're like
their face just like it's like the worst
moment of our life and they're in the
hospital and so I just said you know
it's like we tried on the first child we
couldn't make it happen we tried on the
second child and I just said I can't do
this anymore I said to the mother and
the mothers like let's just try once
more it's like the bushiest mother but
we we ended up not getting any young
children because we couldn't make it
happen so these two kids are probably in
second grade and they're watching
Spongebob Squarepants you can see this
kid is thrilled to be there so that's a
process we cast their hands we the
hospital staff then kind of we wanted
the left and right hand to stay together
so they documented who it was how old
they are what their name was and then
this was the image of and so what
happens when you put your hand so you
can see in this small image like the
cast is a cast of a cast cast as the
cast of cast and so if we had just taken
a cast of the cast this would be
sticking out up the cast of the cast so
this is how we think we're like it's not
nice to put your hand on a three
dimensional hand and we thought now it's
nicer when it's like pressed into the
wood and so you can see that when you
put your hands on this cast
there is actually the sound of water
that comes out of it some of it is
cultural sounds some of those natural
sounds but they're all sounds of water
it's part of our process when we can
afford it and when the client allows us
is it will build full-scale mock ups
on-site so these are all the walls and
we basically we were unhappy with some
of the space spatial sizes so we reap
spray-painted the and then they they we
surveyed the site again and sent us a
new CAD plan oh that's me right here
yeah I wasn't lying
that's me putting the marbles in and
that's that's someone in our office he
was with me and these contractors will
come by and because there's God abuser
away and they make these little funnels
for us but we wanted to kind of show
them with one like we knew they would
just dump these marbles in you can see
all these different boxes of different
colored marbles and we thought it was
really important to make that gradation
so this is that gradation these are the
walls just so you know everything's hard
so the bamboos that came in they didn't
fit in the elevator so you know you get
a call you're like oh and then so they
have to bring it up the service elevator
and cut a hole in the ceiling so this is
what I mean that the project I'm here
speak on behalf of an incredible team of
people people who are careful they built
this MA this temporary staircase so that
they didn't crack these resin walls as
they were installing the bamboos
last story about this project this is
the wood that we used in the project
that would that have the hands embedded
in them we did not design them until I
got a call around 11 o'clock at night
from an urban forester in Chicago and he
said a couple trees that were planted by
Frederick Law Olmsted during the
Columbian Exposition have fallen during
the storm would you like them like are
you kidding me so these are the we had
to share them with some other people but
these are these are these this is the
wood and so this is remembering that
young woman who is now a nurse in that
hospital who said I haven't left the
hospital can you bring a piece of
Chicago into the hospital that I can
touch so this is a piece of Chicago
brought brought for the kids and this is
Bruce kind of Bruce's last name but
Bruce and his wife and they were
instrumental so this is an example of a
material we cut them into 2-inch slabs
dried them and when they came out of the
kiln they were all warped right because
they dried in different ways so we came
up with a solution for that so this is
um this is that hand it's that cute kid
this is another story like the wood was
rotted that's why it fell during the
storm and the craftsman said called me
and said I could cut a piece out of a
piece that we carved out of the inside
and and then place it in here as it and
you wouldn't even be able to tell that
there was rot in the wood and I thought
you know it doesn't seem right right
like it's healing about that and so I
thought about it I thought well Healing
is often leaves a scar you know and it
sits like that that's as beautiful as
the kind of perfection of the wood
itself so instead of pretending like it
wasn't here we actually cast it with
resin to retain the the kind of beauty
of I think this texture and this is a
view from the apprentice woman's
hospital
the last two projects I wanted to talk
about and then you guys will be released
hey I see somebody leaving no our two
projects were working on now one we just
completed but the tanjo waterfront which
is in Tangiers Morocco and the
Prudential Plaza Prudential Center which
is in Boston so this isn't Morocco it's
an incredible place if you've never been
there you should go it is the gateway to
North Africa and this is the view to the
kind of historic part of the city and
this is the view from our site so you
can see Gibraltar from our site
it's an incredible location in it it's a
385 acre site so it's a redevelopment
project and basically the site was a
place where fishermen came and so it's a
it's a working marina
so I'm going to be kind of going through
this relatively quickly but basically
with these kind of larger projects I
wanted to talk about the kind of fractal
process so you saw that in the beginning
we had a big project and a small project
and they're kind of working concurrently
but what we're finding now is as we're
working on these larger projects within
this larger project we are working on it
on the big and the granular at the same
time so we started to develop with the
architect
Nell's and partners out of Texas the
different precincts that we wanted to
create so there's a Garden District
there's a market peninsula there's a all
the cruise ships come into this port
here and they this is a very popular
location for people from Spain and
Europe to come and vacation but Tangiers
is the place where all these writers
came and took a lot of drugs and wrote a
lot of good work
we do a lot of study about where do
people move so important does it make
sense
you can't imagine when you first start
doing the drawings and the architects
putting all the buildings in and then
you draw the like the desire line of how
people are going to get from let's say
like the the four seasons to the
marketplace in it's like there's no
logical connect line and so this this
was a drawing that was done probably a
hundred times to make sure that
everything was interconnected because
when you're making basically we're
making a town you have to make sure that
access is easily seen so this is just a
site plan inserted into like this is the
Medina and this is the area and then
there's a kind of boat launching area so
this diagram became the project it seems
really simple it's this line that we
start to think about how do we start to
make those precincts really clear and so
we started thinking what if this is a
cut and this is an island so you have to
cross bridges to get from here to here
so you really start to make some of
these precincts more special so that's
essentially what we did we basically cut
this pier and made a water fee stepped
waterway that you can access so you can
see it here and then there's a beach
located here so there's a series of open
spaces that we designed and you'll see
these like little law circles and lines
and we're always mindful of what the
view corridor is doing because the other
thing when we started this project you
know you get bogged down in all the
little details but I I realized it's all
about the water when you're at the ocean
you always want to just get to get as
close to the view of the water and so
we're always looking to make sure that
wherever you are you can see a view of
water this is the view of the main plaza
and so this is the source point of the
water as it's moving towards it's
getting pumped from the other side from
the ocean so it's a salt water fountain
concurrently as we're developing that
master plan we were also developing
these different tapestries because in
Tangiers they have an incredible
tradition you walk on the street and
like there's just this incredible
tapestries on the ground so we just
developed a kind of a kid of parts of
different kinds of paving patterns for
the different precincts and then
different tiling patterns for planters
for walls and things like that so that
was a this was a project where we we
could never afford to build a planter
like that here in the US but in Morocco
you can because this is what they do so
these were some of the important
precincts along that boardwalk that
frames the experience and just a detail
of some of the paving patterns and so
they were building up mock-ups as we
were developing the master plan and
that's the kind of fractal language that
we're trying to develop so you'll see in
these perspectives a lot of people who
do planning we rephrase a lot of
planners who look at these larger scale
things when they're actually doing these
perspectives this element and that
element have not been designed yet but
because we worked at two different
scales kind of bringing them together
these perspectives that we did some of
and other people and the renderers did
others we we started to do we know this
is the design right this is the paving
pattern and it comes from the kind of
carpets that we saw on
Cheers this is the beach with a kind of
pop-up market with with like a surfer
dude the boardwalk with the planters and
just looking at the connectivity again
I'd Swannack I always come back to this
we were looking at how do you create
thresholds in this project so these are
some pictures in Tangiers when we were
there it's incredible how they announce
thresholds everywhere it's like you're
entering a new precinct and I think
that's what makes this city so great I
love these three-dimensional ones where
you have a gate within a gate within a
gate or like a gate within a gate so
beautiful and just even on the interiors
it's like a Matisse painting right but
this is where the hotel we stayed in and
so we started to like with these smaller
parks we started to think about how do
we take that idea of a gateway and
modernize it so you can see that we
started to think about creating the
volume but also creating those various
shapes and so there this is a you can
you can see in this plaza we've we in
the master plan we designed this
detailed paving pattern that grey dates
out to the boardwalk but also bless you
but also this gateway and so this you
could see it better here we're still
studying this but just understanding
like you really simplify you just make
the outline of it
than the volume this took like four
months to figure out yeah it's hard to
believe right
this is Tangiers this is actually our
design leader in our office he he
doesn't usually dress like this but we
went into a store and pretty soon he had
a fez on but they didn't get a picture
but just the kind of the detail and the
the color and the the tapestry that's
something we tried to capture in this
project
refuse oh okay
so these are the views and I wanted just
at each of these circles we design those
destinations so instead of a boardwalk
which is a wood board walk all the way
around we decided that we want to create
these destination points and so this is
the one I want to talk about today it
has an incredible view to Gibraltar and
so what we decided was we would design
this kind of multi-level viewing
platform so this was one iteration of it
and then this is the final iteration
made of glass and though I mean
obviously obviously you're gonna have
some handrails and stuff in here but
this is so this is the medina in the
distance and then at night so right now
we're studying like should it be glass
block or should be made like a building
with a glass facade and then just a last
image of the kind of carpet this is a
historic gateway that they had closed
off and we had proposed for them to open
it up and this is the gateway to the
medina so you can actually climb under
within the grade into the medina so
we're opening that up so this is the
gateway to that historic medina
and then this is that carpet that we're
making towards that entrance so you can
see little details this is not something
that we've borrowed from somebody else's
project all of this is patterning that
we've designed ourselves
so in Ariel I hate these kind of
drawings but it just gives you a sense
this is the cut through the site and
concurrently we were working on this
project obviously this is getting built
faster but this isn't downtown Boston
this is the Prudential mall many of you
may have shopped there it is the highest
grossing retail Center in New England so
its square footage is quite high and
what they did was they basically decide
to add a volume in front of the existing
building the fens is here Boston Commons
Copley Square and Boylston Street so
Newbury Street is the fancy street it's
where all the boutique stores are and
Boylston Street sort of the poor cousin
that they're trying to redevelop so
we're working on this project we're
working on this project and another
project down the street and then plenty
of other Landscape Architects are
filling in the missing teeth oh I should
have brought the slide of the first one
but I didn't okay so remember I was
talking about circulation so important
so the first diagram we had when we
started this project was sort of like it
was like everything was at a 90-degree
angle right and so it was assuming like
that people walk like like this and then
they take a right angle like this so we
stopped because it started making a
design that wasn't very interesting we
said if there was nothing in the plaza
how would people get to the front doors
so this was a very difficult project
because there were seven front doors
each equally important this is the front
door to the eataly marketplace this is
the front door to their office tower
these are retail front doors and these
are escalators up to the mall so each
was equally important so we had to
figure out how to do that and so this
was the ultimate diagram that shaped the
project
in fact the circulation shape the
project so you can see that diagram in
here I mean it's much more complex but
essentially the plant the planters this
is above a parking garage are shaped by
the circulation diagram really but
desire lines what's the fastest way when
you're coming down Boston Street that
you want to come in to this area so this
is Boston Street the Hines Convention
Center is here and this is just street
life in Boston and so all those little
portals that we showed in the diagram
this is them you know this idea that the
planter kind of creates these spaces not
only that people can pass through as a
threshold but also that it's a place
where people can sit we really believe
that that like 30 foot buffer that we
put between the street and the central
plaza was crucial to make this place
successful halfway through the project
we got a a wind study done by a
consultant and we found that the entire
site is windy like just on any given day
it's so windy and the new building made
it worse and so these were this is a
developer project and so the thought of
even putting a few trees to block their
signage was like it was like very
painful painful discussions and so we
you know one day I just said you know
what let's embrace the wind there's
nothing you're going to do unless you
enclosed into this entire space so
essentially these wind studies became
the guiding principle of the project the
concept of the project we developed
these wind vanes that actually move with
the wind and the wind have the each wind
vane has a light underneath it and the
color of the LED is tied to a NOAA
sensor
NOAA which is that weather and these are
the NOAA colors and so depending on the
intensity of the wind that is reflected
in the colors of these wind mains so
when there's storm and the plazas red
you know you better get out of there
yeah and I think those winds studies
were incorrect because I've only seen
this red color once it's mostly blues
and purples but so what happened after
that was when we said oh let's embrace
the wind they said that the develop the
client said what if we make an iconic
wind vane wind not wind vane turbine
when turbine at the roof and then they
started adding all the feather stuff
they had solar panels we collected all
the rainwater on the roof so that this
plaza is completely self-sustaining it's
all fed by all of this action on the
roof this is a plan and we kind of we
love paving I think it's really
important in the landscape it's the
carpet that defines the experience so
this is the office entry and we designed
a roof garden for the Eataly marketplace
it has a retractable roof so they can
come out and and party and so even the
planters are defined by this kind of
concept of this windswept landscape so
they all kind of come off of the paving
and their rise up and create these but
the other thing that this does is that
all along here the slab in the garage is
really weak and they didn't want to
spend the money to reinforce that slab
so it did two things we were like
addressing structural issues
I want to just talk about the planter
walls a little bit because we use the
Rhino technology to build it and this
technology allowed for us to get as
close to the actual making of this
landscape we started with these big
slabs of stone and then so this is Ian
downing and Sam Partington in our office
and they were the project managers Sam
was the construction manager she whipped
everyone into shape and so it was really
difficult to convince the client we even
had cold springs come to a meeting to
convince them that it modularizing the
planter didn't make it less expensive
that because we had this technology
everyone who looks at this project they
come looks expensive and it wasn't
inexpensive but it it's because we use
this new technology it didn't matter but
the client didn't believe us and so they
made us make two of the planters the
same and then they got really angry when
the contractor didn't lower the price so
this is one of the planters you can just
see and we study this for like a year we
printed it out we we added clay to see
if it would look nicer at the corner you
know it's very so you could see each one
of these units is different and then the
other I talked to you about the slab
condition so we had to step the
foundation and nine years ago we would
have never been able to build this
project because imagining a contractor
fitting a kind of curved surface on top
of a stepped foundation
you couldn't imagine it but there were
really no problems so each one that's
why each one of these has a shape on the
front and the back because the bottom
also has a shape so these are some of
the different kind of sinuous forms of
this granite and they're solid chunks
and just a model of the veins and the so
this is just some drawings of the light
veins and how they basically there's a
light down here it shines up to here and
this is a custom coil system so it's one
piece of metal that coils up and I don't
know if you can see it but the coil is
more dense at the bottom and opens up as
it gets to the top so we made lots of
studies should it be round should it be
a hockey puck it's more like this
there's no structural engineer in Boston
who was willing to stamp these drawings
so we had to wait to find some some
manufacturer who's willing to to design
both the kind of the system that allows
for this to rotate
but really these civic places they are
places where where people get together
they are community places for the
community engage I think that the client
really wanted these light pulls because
they wanted a place where people would
engage social media and take a picture
of themselves in front of it as the
lights were changing but for us we're
really about making places that allow
for people to express to that it's kind
of a foundation which different kinds of
activities can happen now this central
plaza has become so successful I don't
have actually any pictures of it but
every weekend there's some kind of event
or concert
and I think that's it
are there any questions questions we're
doing that right now
so we're designed oh sure
so there's a question about whether we
use virtual reality there's a way kind
of to get even closer to the project and
yes we do so we're doing these I don't
know if you know what anamorphic art is
but it's this kind of art when you look
at one point of view you can see like a
complete image you see like a face and
then when you turn here it sort of
breaks up so we're doing that for a
university we're creating their sign 20
feet tall but it's anamorphic and so
we're using virtual reality to convince
the school that it works yeah so the
question is what
how does maintainance shape the work
that you do and does it make you sad
when it's low maintenance you know it's
like a parent who has five children you
say who's your favorite child I think
that we we know generally upfront if a
client cannot afford a lot of
maintenance or they don't have the
capacity for that but it doesn't make us
feel that it's a lesser project
sometimes the challenges of a project
makes the project better like if the
project's limitless like it has a
limitless budget it's you know they have
5,000 people taking care of it
you know I think that as a designer it
does help you frame your thinking
because value engineering which is the
term we use to say we can't afford it
you got to cut something out is a really
it it forces you to say what's important
about the project and so for us like
some projects are low maintenance
because of the phenomenological forces
on the site
and you know for us that doesn't make us
sad that makes us excited you know but
in Korea that was a project where I
truly didn't believe them that there was
the kind of that that entire basement
would get filled with water but they
were right and I was wrong so anybody
else questions yes
[Music]
oh when it was flooded you know usually
when it's flooded it's quite dangerous
because it's in the middle of a storm
so they don't want to encourage people
to to come there but I think that there
was a way in which we were able to
incorporate up to what we call a hundred
year storm so those ramps that we showed
actually our registrations of the
different levels but beyond that the
city did not want us to create anything
that that like ramped people down to the
water when there's something beyond a
hundred year storm so there are like a
lot of safety issues that we have to
take into consideration as well great
well thank you so much
[Applause]
