so welcome thank you all for coming I
know we're winding down to the end of
the semester super happy to have Barbara
Bester my old pal from LA in town for
her first visit to Columbus this this
lecture is also co-sponsored by Columbus
AIA so before I introduce Barbara
formally I'm going to turn it over to
John Meegan who's the president of AIA
Columbus this year to say a few words
and then I'll be right back all right
I'll keep it brief Thank You Todd and
thank you for having us on board this is
something that actually we used to do
all the time back years ago and this
year we thought let's try this again
give our our practitioners an
opportunity to come out and and see some
high level design and mix it up a little
bit so I just don't have a whole lot
tonight I just want to just make a
comment
this year we have done some realignment
with the chapter and our our goals one
specific thing is aligning ourselves
strategically again strengthening our
alliances with our allied organizations
specifically KSA is one of that one of
that group we definitely understand the
importance of the work that's being done
here by our students and how that is a
pipeline to the Central Ohio industry
the architectural trades I personally
have brought on several interns over the
past few years and continue to be
impressed by the work that's coming out
of the school we have just last night
was our first kickoff for a new program
that we launched its called archways so
as you're coming out of school keep an
eye out for that it's a it's an alliance
with our chapter local firms and a
formalized mentorship program that we
think will be helpful for both firms and
young practitioners last weekend was the
AIAS quad conference
most of you know we sponsor golf outing
every year and are proud to support the
KSA Association program and and we were
able to raise a little more money and
help the students with a quad Conference
so that was a lot of fun the lecture
series tonight we're glad to bring you
on board to see Barbara's work and I
guess we don't have our slides but I
just want to say thank you to our key
sponsors if any of you are here Pella
windows Carol Meyer design Pro Brad Bush
with insurance for our needs as
architects we have to have some
insurance from time to time and Paul Jay
Ford David Grubbs sponsor sponsors us at
the top level as well so that's that we
did hand out tickets we want to invite
our members over to the Blackwell for
our reception following me via lecture
thank you very much ok so thanks John
we're really excited to be sort of re
partnering up with AIA I think it's a
good connection to have and so let's
make this the first of many
collaborations in the lecture series so
I'm really happy to be able to welcome
Barbara newly christened FAI a last year
right
[Applause]
so as is custom a few professional and
disciplinary bona fides a barber for
those of you who do not know is the
founder of the LA based firm bester
architecture
she's the Julius Shulman distinguished
professor of practice and executive
director of the Julius Shulman Institute
at Woodbury University in Burbank she's
the winner of countless awards and
accolades too many for me to list off
here and she is a longtime fixture in
the Southern California contemporary
architecture scene and so all that is
fantastic and I don't mean to brush over
that too quickly but the reason that I
wanted barber to come and speak with us
tonight it's not her CV it has more to
do with it's much more simple I mean I
just think Barbara is really cool and
and I thought I thought it was important
to share that now I don't mean to make
too light like coolness is a kind of
important concept I would say in Los
Angeles architecture and Barbara really
I think has her finger on the pulse of
what makes LA cool and so I just wanted
to say a few words about that could
maybe help orient the things to look for
as the slides go by today and I think
the big thing about LA or one of the big
things that makes LA interesting in a
cool place to work is that it's a it's a
city of paradoxes and it's and these
paradoxes are something that Barbara I
think really understands she really
understands how they work and she really
understands how to make architecture out
of them so I mean we all understand that
la modernism is is kind of
it benefits quite a lot from the weather
in LA right I mean you know that weather
is particularly amenable to openness and
transparency and the kind of dreams that
were maybe a little bit harder to
achieve in snowy cold Europe but la was
always pretty good at that but at the
same time we understand that la you know
if on one hand the weather drives us
towards openness and transparency
there's also a really kind of clear
attachment to individual autonomy in the
city which drives an architect toward
kind of contrasting positions of let's
say seclusion and privacy and it kind of
tightly guarded kind of precinct 2
attitude and so that that contradiction
I think is something that you'll see in
our in barbers work la of course is a
city of a fair amount of wealth and it's
kind of famed for an attention to kind
of polish and a certain manicured luxury
at the same time and I think more
pervasively la is like pretty gritty
it's it's very kind of down and dirty
it's got a DIY Sensibility there's a
very clear well in Barbara's own terms
bohemian undercurrent that I think
should that dyad I think she understands
very clearly as well it's a city of
stars who are you know kind of carefully
crafted by consultants and managers and
agents and Barbara is certainly a kind
of not a rising star anymore it's it's
like fully risen star within the LA
architecture scene but la is also a city
of anonymous oddballs and people who are
just kind of doing their own thing and
Barbara's a bit of an oddball as well
and I think her clients are equally the
rich and famous and the odd and
idiosyncratic and I really like that as
well another things that la is a city
that's made of made of immigrants and
made for invention I mean everybody in
LA is from somewhere else Barbara
included she was raised in Massachusetts
educated at Harvard before going to sire
to finish our sexual education so in a
way you know everybody in LA is from
somewhere else and as often as not
they're in the process of
coming someone else and that dynamic I
think you'll see in Barbara's
architecture I mean the work really
helps to enable these kinds of
transformations or blossoming x' that
are so much part of the the kind of
lifestyle of LA and so I would say that
these paradoxes and I could go on and on
kind of elaborating these these are a
lot of what makes LA such a fun place to
work and I think Barbara's ability to
negotiate them with such kind of finesse
is what makes her one of the most
exciting practitioners working that city
today so I'm super happy she's here and
please help me welcome Barbara Besser
thank you for a lovely introduction Todd
it was the best of times it was the
worst of times no it's funny I actually
I used to often do it talk about
sunshine and smog as a sort of good way
of looking at LA architecture that the
sort of modernism transparency dialogue
syrup of the sunshine but then the LA
School like the 70s kind of Gary Moore
Phasis Eric on Moss being sort of
currently popularly described as sort of
a smog thing that that that you sort of
have an AC DC current in LA architecture
well this I'm just showing this is sort
of just to ground where I'm coming from
this is my office and Silverlake I've
been in sort of like for a long time but
I finally got like a permanent home and
I'm just sort of showing it off really
but but it's a kind of an open space
like the dream in Italy architectures to
get a bowstring trust-building I have to
I mean I don't own them but two from
Alva's and the big thing that we did was
I sort of organized it around like the
front entry is around this kind of
kitchen cafe thing that ends up being
like a hub for the office a lot of the
time and that's my collaborators and
partners in crime right now we have
about 25 people is largely female which
is sort of coincidental but I think it's
funny given the other statistics out
there I put this up just good this is
sort of you know because we're in school
and there's a there's a way of thinking
about influence and sort of new
movements in architecture this is an old
quote from Margaret Crawford and she's
talking more about sort of the high
modernism and the the Venturi's but I
think that that yours there's certainly
a current moment I think your lecture
poster is a good example of it where
we're kind of let's say the hyper
digital formalism that was pretty
popular until recently is sort of
turning again into some other stuff and
I think so that might be introduced
discussed in terms of this sort of
hi-low influences and I think some of
what I do is maybe in this department of
looking for other sources for kind of
information ideas formal graphic etc
this this building had a big influence
on me this is the Unabomber is cabin
which is in a FBI hangar and the reason
I show it is that at some point I was
well around 9/11 I had I got divorced I
was like really angry and I was looking
for a house and I bought this one which
reminds me of the Unabomber camera and I
thought I thought it was sort of I was
just like I just needed a home that
looks sort of like a home and I know
whatever and so I started doing models
for what I would do to it and first I
was gonna stack these railroad ties
around it and kind of make it like a
preserved shell and then I was gonna
clad it and mirror glass and just leave
the framing and I ended up doing
something much cheaper and simpler which
was this very simple house but this
became a home for myself and my two
daughters and our dog and it became a
little bit of a laboratory I did it I
did it
probably over the course of five or six
months just kind of building it with
some contractors and one of the ideas in
it was was sort of for a house that was
this had they sort of Crazy Eights of
circulation so that a kid on a tricycle
could kind of run inside and outside and
make all these loops and similarly
adults at a cocktail party could kind of
avoid each other if they wanted by
looping around so there's a lot of
outdoor rooms as well as indoor rooms
see and that that project it ended up it
got published a lot it was weird it
wasn't it was sort of in the end I
thought just kind of an a side project
but it ended up getting me this book
deal to do a book on well I would call
it the the kind of suppressed narrative
of modernism in LA which to me was these
very eccentric endeavors by people that
Gregory and Herr Schindler or nature
that were that were a little bit about
LA and some of the issues that Todd was
talking about but also about the
clientele which in the neighborhood that
this book is about so ever like we're
often people move it working in the
movie business or it was kind of a less
segregated area it was more politically
left anyhow so I was kind of when this I
think I did this in 2004 and it was a
time when people still thought of modern
architecture and a more antiseptic way
kind of a you know glass steel Vasili
chair kind of way and so I wanted to
show this illustration of these other
other versions of modernism
a friend of mine Jeff Beck FET rich was
a kind of renowned graphic artist and
artist did illustration so this is his
illustration of the Schindler chapter
that's Schindler in the corner drawing
and this the book itself was
intentionally laid out as a sort of
different kind of project than like a
swiss modernist you know monograph about
architecture so i worked with this guy
michael Worthington has a cow arts and
we developed this sort of language of
like a graphic language and a more
informal way of saying everyone everyone
our photograph kind of with the stuff in
them as it is airs at and in a way I
guess that that kind of speaks to what
would have been like since then sort of
become an issue for me is that looking
at like diverse sources of inspiration
and I'm particularly interested in
strategies that are two-dimensional
strategies of color or text that can add
a lot of atmosphere to a building
without that much cost but so it's kind
of like a third a third layer of
architecture and I see things like the
kind of history of kind of informal
painting on buildings and this is an
artist working on the project about that
same issue but kind of the the palette
of some of the LA as it was when I moved
there right now I'm sure in LA is very
influenced by stuff going on in Vietnam
and China but funnily an in it for LA
right now the all the architects are all
we ever do is talk about Mexico City my
city is the cool place to be if you want
to go somewhere cool you can skip la
apparently and go to Mexico City but but
there is a kind of new emphasis on color
and this this motto is sort of our
office of saying for a while and it
still is I guess and the idea was to
take both the Russian formalist idea of
art is making strange so the the idea
that you could take something every day
you know I'm sort of familiar things and
by looking at them differently or for
training them differently or changing
tweaking them slightly would sort of
create a moment of art where there's
sort of like a pause in one's reading of
that thing and then the idea of the
everyday as well being a kind of like
how can we as architects influence daily
life more you know how do we enhance
that and for a long time for me that was
at a pretty small scale so I did a lot
of projects that are houses and these
are some of my house projects I've done
a lot of things in those houses
kind of experimental color and material
and kind of creating new palates for
living and maybe kind of again you know
enhancing you know daily life or it's a
bathroom or a funny kitchen and some
bigger houses along the way and I guess
in that in that exploration of
domesticity you know maybe kicked off by
my own house a while ago you know
looking at different types of domestic
arrangements I feel like the one of the
things you see when you study sort of
the history of domestic architecture is
a lot of you know normative arrangements
of things kitchens are like this
whatever it and and and i think as we as
we change our lifestyles family
structures or different people's
attention span is different you know
you're trying to get your kids away from
their devices i'm speaking as a parent
but you know how do you create places
that are that are kind of communal
within your home which you would think
would be at home it would be typical and
domestic space but these days you know
can be quite segregated around the
domestic sphere and then i've done a lot
of retail and kind of restaurants and
things and though and again those are
four for me anyhow and for Californians
I think often restaurants or cafes
become like a hub for social activity
kind of like a they're not quite as
lefty as Jurgen Habermas
coffee shop analogy but there there is
something about that where they become
social nodes and even like a like living
rooms for the city and that so what I
want to show sort of bigger projects
that are looking at different kinds of
community and how to build that into
your architecture as well as using these
sort of additional strategy so
blackbirds is a project that is a small
lot subdivision which is a weird la
thing but it's something that the city
and its desired identify has created
some tools to create much smaller Lots
out of existing ones so you can kind of
take say five Lots which is what this
project is and subdivide them into
infinitely smaller pieces as long as you
can provide parking on them so in this
case this lot that was let's see here
this is the existing five Lots
and this would be the typical small lot
scenario is that sort of railroad thing
in the middle where you could sort of
cut it up and each thing is its own sort
of disconnected thing what I was looking
at was or what we proposed was this idea
of stealth density where we both maybe
took some of the wind out of the
NIMBYism of denser housing which we have
a lot of in LA and also looked for an
opportunity for building community so so
in blackbirds the the plan is built
around a communal parking Court using
the idea of the lunar for the living
Street kinda like a Dutch idea where by
day you know the cars are not a wet are
not there and you have this sort of park
like space and at night cars come in and
it you know becomes more filled but I
also set it up so that all of the each
of these houses this is 18 individual
little houses they're sold independently
as houses there's about eight inches a
separation between some of the ones that
are that are pushed together all of
their kitchens look into that parking
lot and all of their into the Central
Park I guess and the entrance their
primary entrances are all there so you
sort of have this that's built in kind
of not landing for people my age type of
scenario and this is the massing of it
so so there's a kind of a
tongue-in-cheek thing where often
there's a set of two houses it looks
like one house and sometimes three
houses look like two houses and that
sort of that that's where the kind of
fun part starts where there's like a
sort of a graphic formal language that's
that's sort of telling a couple
different things this cutaway sort of
shows the arrangement of things but like
say this this unit is three individual
houses with a strip that you hopefully
can't see that kind of separates them
for
seismic and this is a section through
that so as we go down so it was a very
complicated hillside and so a lot of the
houses are sort of embedded in different
ways into the hill so these these guys
each have a different relationship to
the parking thing on the back but they
also addressed the street on the front
and one of the ways of making like
essentially pretty low-cost housing
units have a more architectural quality
from the interior is by leaving the
ceilings opens way to sort of
exaggerated ceilings ceiling heights and
pitches but also those are for the most
part left open so that as you're going
up the stairs you kind of have this real
sense of a more majestic height like in
this drawing illustration and there's
really large openings we used industrial
storefronts generally for the openings
and these are some pictures of it lately
as the landscapes are growing in that's
the parking court here's okay so here's
a section so the ones on the lower part
are literally embedded in the hill
there's a large concrete retaining wall
and and they are kind of facing out more
towards the back and this is the
manifestation and my favorite thing that
happened which was my dream in life
really was that the neighbors have all
become rather friendly that's the air
force through the architect social
engineering but they but there's a
there's a this was like a communal
dinner party that like nine of the
houses had together and I got invited by
one of the house owners and it was like
all we sort of took over the park
parking accordin I just I can't believe
I didn't get a photographer to common
eyes have my bad shots but but that
that's sort of it's it's it's
interesting it's been very very
successful it's uh one of them is for
sale now and the prices are going up but
yeah this is this is how it looks sort
of from the streetscape so also from a
neighbor point of view it has worked out
pretty well because it's kind of added
to the texture of the neighborhood we
really did study the massing of the
existing houses and in Echo Park and
match them
this is a project that I just did
showing this it's kind of funny I did
this maybe a 10 years ago and it was a
coffee shop for one of the first third
wave coffee companies coming la
intelligentsia comfort coffee and it was
their flagship and I had just been to
Turkey and I was really interested in
tile and I kind of got into this idea of
creating a sort of tile runway from the
street up into this place that would
sort of gather people together and also
just provide you know the graphic
signage and then on the top of it if
they're old-world tile thing on the top
a kind of donald judd box and the
barista like a lowered counter for the
brief so that sort of becomes the
theatrical setting between the customer
and the fancy coffee it became very
popular and it's got its own life on
instagram where like it means you've
been distillery like if you post this
picture and this and that it also has
been nominated for like best public
space by a lot of people though that did
sort of provide this corner in the
neighborhood that has has become quite a
communal hangout and another project
down the block i guess i do a lot of
stuff in silver i call that lately i've
been expanding this is a project for the
Silver Lake Conservatory of Music which
was in a it's a rehab of an existing
former warehouse building and the this
is a music school started by flee from
the Chili Peppers and it provides
low-cost music instruction to private
student that also has a whole huge
nonprofit function for students who
can't afford to pay kind of replacing
the music education programs that have
been defunded in California and we were
we sort of stripped back the front and
then added some brickwork we couldn't
really afford to do it with glazed tile
but on the inside there's a there's a
kind of facade that's really about older
Hollywood on the inside there's these
sort of different structures that really
segregate different communities and then
also bring them together so the front
lobby is really a living room for the
musicians who teach there and the
parents waiting for their kids
and then there's this kind of street in
interior street with the lesson rooms
that's for the kids taking lessons built
around this reflective box which houses
a rather large amount of bathrooms that
we had to have for our assembly place
which is the the back space so it's a
kind of a multiple multiple kind of
groups and communities sort of
overlapping in the space so I have a
little
[Music]
so yeah so we so we actually recreated
their original space a little bit on the
outside with this sort of old fun
furniture that we had put in the first
space that they had so we were this is
almost like a little Museum of the
original building that they were in and
then this is our kind of kala gari
corridor for kids with their rehearsal
rooms this is sort of the architecture
of the interiors and this does volume
with the super graphic is I kind of call
it like the disco ball there was some
existing skylights and we added one and
we were really using it to refract light
around we didn't have a choice about the
quantity of bathrooms so we hadn't
rather than kind of tuck him to the side
and pushing everything in the middle by
just making a kind of a mute ball like
thing in the middle
it allowed it both allowed me to sort of
have this sort of smaller scale
circulation but also move light around
the center and then the theater itself
the the assembly hall has sort of just
takes advantage of the building's
original structure
and that's from the opening this just
opened less than a year ago another
little project along the same well and
the sort of neighborhood sign this is a
this is a project we're working on for a
senior citizen group in Los Feliz that
is looking to move across the street and
convince the parks to let them build a
real space they have these trailers
right now and so we have been doing a
study and then a this is our kind of
proposed rendering that we're using for
fundraising for them so we're we were
making a multi-purpose space and then a
kind of extended porch onto the main
street that becomes like a porch for the
seniors just at on but also for kind of
interaction there's a couple of kids
parks and soccer fields around there so
it becomes sort of like a public zone in
the city that that can also double as a
rental function a different kind of
urbanism is some stuff that we've been
doing a fair amount of these large
tenant improvement sort of tech campus
projects lately and this is one for
beats by dre headphones which is now on
Apple music or owned by Apple music and
this was a two-story typewriter
warehouse in Culver City right near
Erica and Moss's territory and we were
kitty-corner from his office actually we
were what we did we sort of took this
existing building we cut two big atrium
spaces and one long corridor through the
middle creating kind of these these
different again different sources of
light had a very low ceiling Florida
Falls you know Florida floor plates but
we were trying to create pieces of
expansion and also a language that sort
of about beats like here in the lobby
these are court red beats cords which is
their sort of signature headphone cord
kind of tied around the columns there's
a hilarious amount of columns in this
building that are not on any grid and
unfortunately we were not allowed to
remove any because the way this whole
area of Culver City is built on fill
next to a creek that basically if you
take a column out your building like a
hundred foot caisson each time so
you don't take any column so you just
wrap them in red cords so so this is so
this is that Main Street which connects
the parking garage for the employees on
one end in the in the main lobby on the
other and was intentionally done as a
sort of dramatic museum stair kind of
sort of this public space that would
really try and connecting the the upper
floor in the lower floor on the left is
a lot of mirrored stainless steel in a
boardroom and a cafe that that is kind
of placed so that it becomes a check-in
place for everybody coming from the
parking garage and also sort of during
the day a hangout space and then one of
the atriums is is organized for the
people who are running the ops
department this is the thing when you're
doing this is a campus for about 500
people 600 people you have many
different groups you have engineers
marketing people ops people kind of
different lifestyles and work styles and
so there's within each area there are
some different kinds of smaller scale
difference but on a larger scale this
group is or the people who move shipping
containers around at midnight you know
are midnight in the South Seas and
they're on a kind of weird schedule they
wanted a very calm almost library like
sort of atmosphere and that the blueness
and some of the furniture in here became
that space we built out all the
skylights that are in here and around
each of these atrium are located these
open meeting rooms that have a kind of
village like windows on to each other
and into the larger space so so there's
a sense of kind of visual community
building across the spaces and there's
also a lot of connecting bits like this
which are built around those
aforementioned columns but also taking
those as opportunities for bits of
millwork or bits of gathering this
became like one of the most Instagram
spaces in the beat's campus and you can
kind of see from one connector piece
through the cafe to the other piece to
the other atrium this this this one is
for the marketing people and I sort of
done more as a stripped down all
whiteboard art school environment they
to kind of be able to put up their
ongoing projects for branding and
there's a secret staring next to that
main stair that's that's really like the
stair for the introvert who doesn't want
to go down to big museums there every
time they want to go get a cup of coffee
and we wrap that in this brass laminate
and kind of created a different sort of
private zone in there these are some of
the graphics that would sit so because
again this is such a large spread out
footprint we kind of set it up with
quadrants defined by color in order to
help with wayfinding and then we
developed a whole bunch of wallpapers
that are pretty simple to use without
without this throughout the space so
those are usually in meeting rooms and
they're also signifiers on door so you
kind of know like oh I'm in the blue
zone I'm in the green zone but it's
pretty subtle the idea was to not make
the graphic kind of in-your-face except
in some places this is the this is the
celebrities
this is them where the executives are
and like LeBron James is coming over to
you know do something so that has its
own back stair and we thought it'd be
funny to make all that stuff kind of
gold and silver and blingy the and this
is this is another one the executive
offices where we did a pattern more
about Beats we also commissioned a lot
of photographs from me one bomb we had
him fly around LA and a helicopter and
take pictures of some places that were
important to the guys who founded beats
but also places that were kind of
different points of view about LA and we
used those as super graphics too in some
of the different meeting rooms and some
of the larger spaces to kind of give a
sense of rootedness I think with Beats
because they were kind of a tech
business but kind of really they were
coming from the music business which is
a very different Gestalt
you know they were kind of looking for
ways to keep it about LA keep it fun
like the sort of music thing but also be
tech friendly this was actually a
whiteboard that we made this is usually
I use this for my sunshine versus smog
talk but this is it looks like smog
that's really just morning haze but it
was kind of fun as you can you can use
an image like that and make it
bordered by a special treatment another
campus we have been working on a lot of
buildings for us snapchat in Santa
Monica who are moving from Venice and we
were we have been working very quickly
going through these existing buildings
and changing them this one used to be
the Museum of flying in Santa Monica and
we developed this palette and language
that had to do with bringing nature in
the the this building is defined by some
really big chunks of space that don't
have windows oh they have some indirect
light and so I was looking to use a
language where the there's kind of
there's wood there's graphics that we
made that are that are you know leaf eat
and then there's you know all the
different materials of the fabric it
kind of look like sisal though that's
not and we created a couple of these
freestanding structures and he's big
there's two big warehouse volumes that
become like an informal meeting area
inside so something like this we a lot
of these windows have been covered and
we kind of opened everything up and
that's one of our freeform meeting rooms
there's a lot of informal meeting space
so again you're kind of almost as doing
urban design when you do projects like
this because this is probably 200 people
in here and so how do you know different
kinds of spaces for different kinds of
work and activity but also different
kinds of people this is like a waiting
room for the HR department for people
being interviewed we use some of the
snap yellow very sparingly to highlight
the structure in the building
let's sort of before they moved in this
is how one of those meeting rooms work
kind of defining an in this big plate of
desk kind of like a more sort of special
space that helped organize the space
around it and here's another concept
this is a concept project for a part of
Apple that was a media thing where
they're taking a where there's a
warehouse below that we're sort of
stuffing a lot of their programs of
performance and recording and then
designing a place above it that was sort
of for artists and people working there
so you kind of would think of the I call
it a super Street it's like a whole
movie studio compressed into a box and
then above it you sort of you go in and
out depending on what you're doing below
so that's sort of what that section that
the cloud is the part that we would be
building new and then we'd be rebuilding
the lower part this is the cloud part
and that's sort of looking down at to
some performance space there's a view of
it on another totally different thing
but again kind of in the California as
the home of Technology and design tip
which is kind of a big thing that's
going on in California this is a lot
inner house called silver top that I was
working on for about three years and
just finished recently and it's this
amazing house that's really built around
these sort of infrastructural principles
it was a lot nervous working with his
client Reiner was a manufacturer of
metal clips for the world war two and
then later on turn that into sort of a
hairclip business after the war and made
a lot of money in clips and wanted to
use the house as a kind of research
project you given had a big debate well
fight with the tax Bureau about whether
he could write off the whole house as a
research project but they were kind of
looking at like think of like the house
of the future projects within this
within this structure so there's a I can
85-foot concrete shell spans is the
first show the concrete show the longer
and they'd gone to look at narrow V's
Olympic Stadium and they
that and her boy they've gotten did a
lot of homework in how to kind of start
to use these new infrastructure Allah
Jesus itself is built around these two
brick walls which are those visible
curves and then the spanning concrete
shell goes over the living room there
when we when we the house was in truth
was never finished it was abandoned in
like 1965 because Reiner ran out of
money and then it sold in the early 70s
to a couple who kind of moved in and
patched up some stuff but hadn't really
ever been completely finished and art my
client bought it from those people
there's some construction photos so this
is built between let's say 60 and 65
kind of freeway technology here with
this 20-foot cantilever driveway and and
so art my client was was also from the
tech world and wanted to add a whole
layer of Technology under the existing
kind of visible technology and so what
we ended up doing was creating a whole
lot of analog let's say interfaces or
user experience moments and then with a
pretty big digital background which is
stored and you conveniently complicated
tunnels that go underneath this house so
this is a brass plate that's engraved by
with patterns that Jeff McFerrin who I
work with a lot did that are kind of a
language
harab lifx if you will of things in the
house that have movement or any other
sort of technologies that are in there
so the there's a sort of dictionary that
goes with the oh and here are some of
the moving parts
so some of these are ours that we added
and some of them are original well part
of what we did was we've made some of
the technology work better a lot of the
machines had been kind of built in a way
that you might n I think 60 but the
motors and stuff weren't up to snuff
this is the amazing space of the of the
large living room interior and the house
is very transparent so it has the
illusion of being the top of the hill
the shell becomes like the top of the
hill and below it is glass we also add
allowing we then what was nice as an
architect I was able to build out a
kitchen and a master bath I'm gonna add
some pieces there because those were
parts that had never been finished
originally most of the house is a
restoration and then the parts that were
unfinished were kind of fair game but
the the the logic that we used with a
lot of historians consulting was to take
the same Cypress the house has a lot of
horizontal bands of cypress and take
that same material but anything that we
were doing knew we would run it
vertically with these thin strips it
also allowed us to do a more organic
language of cabinetry than had been in
the original house so our pieces are
kind of undulating wooden pieces that
are sort of inserts into the the bigger
shelves but also read as contemporary
and therefore don't you know clutter the
historical record these are some piece
so there's an existing terrarium and we
in the ceiling scape is existing as art
of amazing columns but then we our kind
of kitchen project wanders around it we
did several weeks of research at the
Getty who has all the drawings for the
house these are some of the other rooms
we automated a lot of these shutters
that had been manual originally this
piece this is a new interior for a
bathroom that hadn't been finished and
we put in a there's a five ton piece of
glass that goes into a motor down into
the floor we kind of dug out
Tunnel it's for the most expensive thing
we did in the house and there's
similarly a frameless glass skylight so
you can push a button and make it an
outdoor shower in this garden I'm like
when do I get to host it that hasn't
happened yet so yeah so these are some
of the this is sort of how the original
house worked there also the lighting it
had like no light at night so that was
one of the great things we were able to
do it's like without changing anything
but architecture kind of really
illuminated using a lot of LEDs and
stuff for evening it has the first
Horizon pool and this is a guest house
that's part of the can't the driveway
that goes around at cantilevering off of
this cylinder cylindrical structure so
this is the overall campus as it were on
a while ago I did a project and
installation in the gallery at Zurich
and it's a space that's often used by
architecture firms or given to
architecture firms to do a project for a
month or two and I wanted to do a
project that was for the students and at
the time I thought people were just
spending way too much time on their
computer and not having enough fun and
so I thought be good to do a disco in
the space and so this is this this is
this project where the I took a I was
also it's also kind of a joke because
there's also a preponderance of
polyhedrons going on in school at the
time I was teaching Jose enough with the
body tour so I took a polyhedron and
then unpacked it using pepakura
and then that became the structure so
the unpacked kind of shape including the
tabs and stuff is the shape of this
project a little meta but the but then
the but it's made out of plywood with
these inset sort of laser-cut mirror
plexi and then also a layer of sort of
super graphic so this is the the disco
floor became this sort of central space
nose I think I was working on beats the
time so I got beats to donate speakers
so anyone could come along and plug on
their iPhone and turn it into a disco
you know on a slow night and there was
also a space what I was really
interested was the sort of the other
space so you have this dance floor as
over the main floor but you also have
the residual space of the kind of
unfolded pieces and that that we used
sort of tinted color we'd built in
little beds and banquettes and kind of
resting spaces so we were sort of like a
an underside to that installation
this is Denise Scott Brown but I guess
it's particularly relevant these days I
got I got sort of interested and
concerned about you know women
architects and designers getting left
out of the Wikipedia at the time a
couple years ago there was kind of
everyone suddenly realizing that if you
didn't have an article about that person
published since the digital era they
sort of disappear from the from the
record because more and more students
are only using digital sources and you
know not every book is scanned and so I
got interested in kind of a curatorial
project of bringing people back into the
current digital record by doing shows
about them getting articles written
getting their work archived etc so one
of the first things I did about that was
a project about Deborah Sussman Deborah
Sussman worked with Gary she worked for
the Eames is a long time ago but she was
particularly known for her work on the
LA Olympics 1984 Olympics were this wild
let's see those are some pieces of her
things they were really like a paper
architecture Olympics where Deborah
Sussman along with John dirty and some
other people kind of changed the whole
city for a week or so with these
scaffolds and paper and installations
and really a very strong palette that
kind of came to be what we think of as
the palette of the 1980s that color
palette became like one of LA the
biggest exports you know at the time and
really put the city on the map as in a
different kind of a way that had been
before and so
these are sonotubes you know rapped
painted and wrapped in stickers and
stuff and and they I just thought this
work was so great and I was shocked I
couldn't find it
wait so we did a show Deborah was still
alive she passed away unfortunately soon
after I believe I think she did that
Wilde sign in Cincinnati the little
thing that says Cincinnati I'm not let
you see off the highway but happily her
work got archived by the Getty and LACMA
as a result and so and she's in
Wikipedia now and there's a lot of
articles matter so that I guess I'm
saying it cuz you all should do that
like it's kind of a good thing to do is
people that you like regardless even if
gender but 20th century people are kind
of not getting design history is hard to
maintain in digital era unless people
are writing new things about work that's
happened before so this this is a design
project this is we did not curate this
but I did a I designed an exhibit for a
show about Lina Bo Bardi and Albert Frey
that was at the Palm Springs Art Museum
just this just a few months ago and it
was part of the Getty PST series where
they were kind of looking at Latin
America in American art and there was a
kind of interesting so a little bit of
crossover between Lina Bo Bardi
and Albert Frey and Palm Springs and
what I tried to do to organize it with
the artifacts often for architecture as
I'm sure you know are often a little dry
for the for the regular viewer they're
drawings
maybe there's a model it's often black
and white and so we wanted to give a
stronger sense of the work of these
architects and one way in I thought was
the palette that they used like Albert
Freya sort of known for these circular
windows and a kind of his own houses was
kind of a remarkable turquoise and
yellow and in Palm Springs City Hall
Liam Babar D I bet influenced this
building but you know was amazing
architect in Brazil and she's got very
kind of bolder colors but also some
really interesting shapes like these
kind of shapes that look like a comic
book you know power through a wall and
so I took this is the this is sort of
Lina Bo Bardi
and Albert Freight colors but this is
the Lina Bo Bardi palette that we were
using and we we kind of took the idea of
the shape and the color to organize the
exhibit oh sorry that was Liam right so
this is the Albert Frei palette and then
this is we've sort of built a couple of
walls and some tables and some other and
some use a lot of vinyl on the floor as
well to kind of create this immersive
experience where basically the art one
architect was on one hat one angle
through this space and the other and
they sort of bleed through each other in
the middle so this is kind of this is in
Bo Bardi looking at fray but the new
some of her furniture pieces this is
fray not really looking at my Marty but
and I think it was it was successful
that did also I think a lot of people
that saw that are let's say civilians
not architects kind of you know
hopefully we kept them there more to
look at the work of these remarkable
architects while in Palm Springs I've
been working on a project near that
which is a kind of weird new kind of
hotel based on the concept of Airbnb
where you rent a you rent a five five or
six bedroom villa as your room so you
sort of create a vertical
sort of Palm Springs Hacienda condensed
verticalized with pools either in the
back or on the roof and it's kind of
organized along in an interior street
slightly related to blackbirds that's
mean that where you could you could use
the whole thing as a wedding or you
could have the farmers market there so
this is sort of the overall view of it
each of these structures is an
independent room that you would rent and
it's there's a sort of probably shutting
down Airbnb in Palm Springs to because
it's people get mad about you know
people rent like 20 people going to
Coachella renting a house and the kind
of spread out residential neighborhood
so the idea was like take that kind of
strategy and turn it into something
different so there's fools on the roof
and
so on and then this I think while I was
in Palm Springs too much I was looking a
lot of Albert Frei and kind of thinking
about California modernism and it's it's
sort of formal vocabulary and I got this
fun project in Napa Valley which is a
winery that is called ashes and diamonds
and the client really wanted a
California design centric winery I think
if you've been to Napa Valley a lot of
the wineries there are are kind of
inspired by Renaissance Italy or you
know French chateaus and this is the
site kind of to their upper law in the
middle there and so we were we were
given both the landscape Commission and
the architecture and so there's a big
part of it is the production place which
is you know it has to be a relatively
inexpensive thing but there's are like a
big chunk of production and then there's
also hospitality which is where all the
sales and it kind of drives the income
of the winery this is our plan realized
so on the left is the production zone
and our hospitality space and then the
landscape that we built around it as
well and this also being slightly step
back from the main highway and Napa in a
way the building kind of had to act as a
sign for itself you can't really do
regular signage in Napa do the
restrictions so so the building had to
be probably more venturi and your
average building in terms of speaking to
the to the passers-by and on the on the
production side I kind of pulled some of
it out to do a little bit of hospitality
space underneath it as well and then the
inside this is the crushed pad and some
of the tanks and how the wine is
actually stored so that's all a very you
know relatively inexpensive metal
building and then just kind of
manipulating the edges that are
part of the more public face this is a
hospitality zone and inside the
production space and then the main
hospitality building is a very simple
structure it's almost like a kind of
expanded living room alone and then with
the shade structure over it that that
acts as that sign and the shade
structure is perforated it does get
incredibly hot and NAPA so you sort of
create this shade we've grade the shades
on the outside and on the inside much
more of a obvious nod to kind of classic
modernism and the let's say the Julius
Shulman kind of view of things but in a
in a kind of unorthodox landscape so
this is inside hospitality there's a
bunch of different public spaces in the
landscape as well and using the
production building as the backdrop for
projections and that's it Twilight and
that is my last slide so that's kind of
looking for the landscape at the at the
hospitality building thank you very much
if anyone has any questions I'd be happy
to answer something
well I I come from like a let's say a
super nerdy serious architecture fangirl
background I mean I sort of I've been I
think I've been studying architecture
since I was in high school so I guess I
felt at some point though and I think it
has to do with building that first house
myself I already been a professor for
maybe ten years before I did that and I
had a little bit of the screw at
attitude at that time because of this
divorce to be honest and I had been
following all the rules and I did like
beautiful white boxes that were very you
know serious and I just was kind of I
kind of was like I think I'm just gonna
go to art school forget it and then I
kind of got a couple jobs and I thought
but if I try to do just whatever I want
to do instead so it's it's a little
weird because not everyone has that
freedom you know or has that I mean most
of us I think who come to architecture
come from probably obsessive personality
types and we're very serious and we have
we like the rules there's a lot of rules
you know so I guess I guess I a long
time ago when I was much more serious I
think I saw Gary give a lecture at the
GSD like in the 80s or something and he
was just he didn't say anything you're
just like yeah so this is a I did this
is amol you know I was like that how
could he do that but in a way I kind of
feel like I've started to train myself
to act that way because it actually
works better for clients and it is kind
of a way of looking at it at the at the
profession where in the end the results
do matter you know a lot more than the
process in terms of how it works in the
world and so I'm pretty controlling and
specific about like what actually
happens but I don't think I have to
rationalize it as much as as I probably
used to or as I could if I was in if I
was forced to I could I could you know
go down a different road of how to
articulate work but a lot of times I get
asked to lecture as like this
representative of California nests or
something and
and so I I sort of play along with that
yes
well I guess I feel like inevitably
whatnot never leave but architecture
often is like a subject in either in the
background or it can be the object in
social media I don't think that's a very
strong place for architecture to be you
know I think that what I feel like what
I really do is that my job as an
architect is to work harder to get
people's attention away from social
media by giving them spaces that allow
them to connect people or create
community stuff like that those are
that's kind of really what I'm trying to
do but I feel like you have to use some
of those techniques in order to do that
like you can't you can't really seduce
anyone as much by sort of a pure Ando
zone these days as you may be used to
because you know there's got like things
bleeping all over the place so so I
think I don't I I don't like anything I
hate stuff like the Museum of ice cream
and stuff like that like the things that
are done purely for Instagram stuff I
think that's like incredibly superficial
and horrible and then unspool frankly
and consumerist but i do think that it
is important to be pretty aware of how
people get information now and how they
see themselves in the world and how you
know attached they are to those images
so I think it's just I think it's an
important it's almost maybe a more
anthropological that we kind of have to
look at what architecture does in that
not what it doesn't at space but how it
operates you know is it is it is
architecture branding and therefore you
know you take a picture of the I know
that's not you know like whatever some
the Eiffel Tower and I'm embarrassed
like that is it that would that would
drive everything to be more iconic
monumental kind of architecture which
isn't that's really it's so great for
you know building I mean II but I do
think that on the other hand like
pleasure and like play and you know
spaces are fun or kind of you know
brighten up your daily life in some way
are really valuable and sometimes that
might mean that they I mean to me that
that that tile thing was like it was
right before all that stuff started and
it kind of was an early thing and it you
know
became this kind of funny graphic that
did have a lot of play and social media
but it's sort of predated that even
being an issue now I don't do that I
mean I don't I haven't used that kind of
pattern time a long time because my gosh
it's so played out but it's but it's but
it you do sort of want to be aware of it
I guess I guess the other thing I'll say
that the two-dimensional thing the idea
that you can create atmosphere through
two-dimensional things is I think an
important strategy in a world where
budgets aren't that high and material
and labor is only getting higher so so
being able to look at you know pattern
or wallpapers or murals where like as
something or color as a way of creating
sort of spatial significance I think is
a good thing to also put in your toolkit
as an architect thank you
[Applause]
