welcome everyone to the Ballmer lecture
series my name is Ashley Bigham I'm an
assistant professor at the School of
Architecture at the Knowlton School and
it's my privilege to introduce tonight's
speaker Keith Crum woody tonight is
particularly exciting because Keith's
lecture kicks off the fulfilled
symposium which will continue here in
this auditorium tomorrow morning at
10:00 a.m. as a symposium and exhibition
fulfilled will consider the role of
architecture in a culture shaped by the
excessive manufacturer and ass wage 'men
of desire it will do this through three
main themes of material logistical and
cultural fulfillment immediately
following this lecture tonight we invite
everyone to join us in the band vard
gallery for a reception for the
exhibition which is accompanying the
symposium and there will be food catered
by IKEA in case you're interested
fingers crossed everybody in addition to
be a designer and writer keith is the
Dean of architecture at the California
College of the Arts he's previously
taught at UC Berkeley MIT the New Jersey
Institute of Technology where he served
as director of graduate architecture
programs Yale University where he served
as assistant dean for the School of
Architecture Rice University and the
Otis College of Art and Design
he holds a Master of Architecture degree
from sci-arc where he was awarded the
best thesis prize and a Bachelor of Arts
degree with honors and architecture from
UC Berkeley keith has exhibited at the
2017 Chicago biennial the Lisbon
architecture tree in Olli the Cooper
Union School of Architecture the Sam Fox
School of Design at Washington
University in st. Louis Princeton
University's School of Architecture and
many other venues in 2018 he was a Rome
prize fellow in architecture at the
American Academy in Rome where he
completed his project entitled a pattern
book of houses for a world after the end
of work in which he investigated origins
of the suburban house on the Italian
peninsula
at a symposium on fulfillment and desire
I could think of no better way to begin
than with this lecture
Keith's book atlas of another America
published in 2016
beautifully describes a generation of
American longing a long elegy to the
American dream a dream which is perhaps
the epitome of a constructed American
desire a work of architectural satire
the book exposes America's collective
vices our love of image over content and
our maniacal tendency to conform his
book beautifully illustrates the
thirty-six states of freedom land with
names like Levittown the younger
Smiley's acres and some supermodel homes
where many writers express the failure
of the American dream as the dire result
of a current financial climate or social
crisis I would argue that Keith's unique
ability to approach serious issues with
humor and irony increase their potency
within the discipline but to see this
work only as a work of satire might also
miss the point Keith at his core as a
designer and designers are known to
leave traces of optimism the very active
design itself is optimistic as it
promises first that is possible to
impact the future and second that the
future would be worthy of artistic
delights this is what key sets Keith
apart his designs are powerful enough to
be both satirical and sincere keith has
not given up on dreams altogether but
asks for a new collective dream to
emerge maybe we'll see you're laughing
with that in mind
Keith's work will act as a foundation
for tomorrow's symposium and please join
me in welcoming Keith Cromartie there's
no way that I can live up to that but I
haven't given up on dreams so that part
was true I did not complete what
actually said I was going to complete at
the American Academy that's what I told
them I was going to do I did something
else entirely which is not uncommon it's
really wonderful to be back at OSU I was
here in 2008 to lecture in this very
room as I began my research on some of
the things that I'll show you tonight
after which I remember Rob lubes
he asked me why I cared about this
something along those lines
and I really probably couldn't explain
very well at that point in time why do I
care about these houses that I'm going
to show you tonight but hopefully after
I show you some of the work that I've
been doing over the last 10 years you
might get a sense of why I think it's
important to look at these things
most of what I present tonight will be
drawn from atlas of another America a
collection of stories about the American
Dream produced through a combination of
materials words images plans that I've
collected over the years
atlas of another America is a satirical
study of the American Dream delivered in
the form of a fictional architectural
treatise for a utopia called freedom
land it's a critique of both American
culture reflecting on the choices we've
made and the choices we might have made
and of architecture culture mocking its
hubris and it's often complicit
relationship to power and privilege the
book is modeled on a historical
architectural treatises and pattern
books from the past which were popular
means of disseminating and promoting
architectural ideas and significantly
architectural practices in the 17th and
18th centuries these books flourished in
England with the rise of Enlightenment
thinking and continued to be popular
both in England and the u.s. throughout
the 19th century alongside the rise of
industrial capitalism the origins of
these books are of course in Palladio Z
Quattro Libre in 1570 which was widely
reprinted and distributed throughout the
17th and 18th centuries most frequently
in England on the Left we had the
frontispiece from Pilate owes
publication on the right column
Campbell's English version of Knight
1728 reworked to include a bust of
Pilate Oh in the broken pediment at the
top as can be seen in these two
engravings the frontispiece is in an
architectural treatise or in their later
progeny architectural pattern books were
used to set the tone for the work that
followed situating it in relation to
great models from history and presenting
the tools of the architectural trade by
which it was produced often the
frontispiece was also used to set the
scene for the work that followed as we
see here in William Wright's amazing and
slightly perverse grotesque architecture
or rural amusement of 1790 the book of
designs for outbuildings and follies
with which to an English gentleman could
adore in his estate
similarly in atlas of another America
the frontispiece is used to claim a
place for freedom land in the early
idealized conception of North America as
an untamed nature soon to be subjected
to the great American conceit of
manifest destiny but before I present
freedom land I'd like to begin with some
stories from the appendix to better
situate the ideas and methods and
histories guiding the work to reveal the
materials from which freedom land was
built and you ought to forgive me I'm
gonna read quite a bit tonight but
there's gonna always be like lots of
what I think are really amazing plans to
look at but you might think are just
shitty suburban houses hmm so six super
plans is an analysis of the houses
specifically the plans of America's
largest commercial home builders these
plans are the primary building blocks of
freedom land and if your forgive me I'd
like to read from this piece the
suburban single-family house more than
any other object is the primary symbol
of success in America it's the
preeminent representation of its owner's
aspirations it functions to construct
individual identity and register
personal achievement to own a home is to
live the dream American home builders
have long capitalized on this equation
which binds the house as an object to
the dream as a concept these house
products the primary building blocks of
the contemporary suburban metropolis are
carefully calibrated weapons of commerce
that connect with and simultaneously
create the domestic expectations of
consumers well we might be reluctant to
categorize these products as
architecture to dismiss them out of hand
is to disconnect Architecture from a
live current of contemporary culture the
individual plan is used in the marketing
materials of home builders Maps out an
idea of domestic fulfillment of a
possible lifestyle for the prospective
homebuyer many plans when analyzed
critically offer evidence of an
underlying set of six distinct plan
types that form the core of the home
builders arsenal and allow them to
deliver different levels of design to
diverse array of home buyers two of
these types the Foursquare in the
laminar which you can see on the left
and the slide are essentially variations
of long used production house types the
other four types the cellular bisected
nuclear and branching all betray some
relationship
to the simpler foursquare and laminer
organizational techniques and offer
evidence of the builders carefully
considered reorganizations &
amplifications of familiar domestic
arrangements these primary
organizational arrangements are
complemented by the knowing use of an
array of design techniques including the
thickening of surfaces the exploitation
of diagonal lines of sight and movement
the cinah graphic layering of space and
the deployment of distinct room shapes
and profiles they're essentially
collecting they're sweeping the history
of architecture and picking up anything
that allows them to create distinction
that's while only six basic types define
the Canon of the contemporary American
production house an innumerable number
of variations or models allow that house
to be marketed as a customized product
providing a sense of distinct luxury to
each buyer regardless of income level
and so quickly I'll just show you so
most of these like all the slides in
this format are from the book so it's a
very short little analytical piece and
then I go through and present five cases
of each type so here you have the four
square all these plans are at the same
scale so you know if you go from the
upper left to the bottom right you can
see that kind of just wide swing of
scale and size distributed across the
suburban landscape here's the laminar
this cellular cellular you can for me it
was like these were the houses I
actually couldn't squeeze into any of
the other five types they're kind of
just like cancerous agglomerations of
rooms the nuclear which I have a hard
time like not thinking of George Bush
saying nuclear
the bisected which is pretty familiar to
us particularly the the middle one here
I can't read on the screen
it's a Toll Brothers the Mirador a kind
of Palladian arrangement and then the
branching plan which i think is one of
the most sophisticated really exploiting
just the simple exploitation of the
diagonal line to give a sense of greater
scale and size to a relatively simple
arrangement these houses these typical
plans are everywhere in some form or
another there are nuclear versions in
the deserts of the southwest bisected
versions roaming the edges of cities
from New York to Atlanta to Columbus
branching plans reproducing and running
wild across the prairies of Texas and
the forests of the southeast ignoring
them won't make them go away and
ignoring the the desires that they
engender and serve won't make them go
away either in atlas of another America
I decided to take the houses seriously
if sometimes comically and to make
demands at them what other stories could
these houses tell what are their limits
but in working on the houses or should I
say working with the houses I felt that
it was necessary not just to understand
the houses as we see them today but to
also understand how we got here where
does the bail one come from Toll
Brothers are my favorite builders in
order to answer that question I look
back to the architectural treatises and
pattern books of the past back to the
Palladio father or better a patron saint
of the suburban ideal that still haunts
American and residential design logics
and development patterns pilate has four
books provide the model for many
domestic pattern books in England in the
18th century like this one by William
Halfpenny in 1749 and his designs
provided the model for the houses that
populated the pages of these books
although not as expertly delivered an
increasingly with the rise of
Enlightenment conception was
enlightenment can such conceptions of
self the private dwelling became and
John archers term a medium through which
to construct identity and anchor oneself
in space
in short the house becomes a path to
fulfillment
to wit henry wotton writing in 1624 and
the elements of architecture describes
the house as follows every man's proper
mane shin house in home is a theater of
his hospitality the seed of his self
fruition that comfortable is part of his
own life the noblest of his sons
inheritance a kind of private Princeton
nay to the possessors thereof an epitome
of the whole world in England the
pattern book sought to distribute the
promise of the rural house to all
classes of people the gentlemen but also
the farmer and the peasant and where
formerly the house stood alone on the
white page of a book like Pilate owes
Dilla's increasingly it came to be
rendered in an idealized rural or
natural landscape its own little Eden or
rural agrarian paradise and we see very
early in these pattern book houses the
claim for luxury and grandeur and
uniqueness that is still present in the
suburban houses of today this is the
plan and elevation for a small house in
the style of the Chateau and here we
have a villa in the style of an abbey by
Richard Elson Elson writes in his essay
on rural architecture of 1803 that quote
in the country the gentleman is at full
liberty to do just as he pleases and the
architect has a full scope to display
his genius and talents no wonder then to
find gentlemen whose employment and
business lie in the city but are so
desirous of a villa or country house a
few miles out of town and across the
English Channel at about the same time
durÃ¡n here with LeDoux standing in
writes that if happiness and if
happiness and here's my parenthetical
and isn't this another way of describing
fulfilment is anywhere to be found it's
surely in a country house agreeably
sited far from the cares of business
that tumult of cities and the vices and
over populous communities in such
peaceable dwellings the sweetest repose
may be enjoyed and the joys of study
savored without distraction
they are the delights of friendship or
unconstrained and the soul is exalted by
the Magnificent spectacle of nature in
1804 I'm in Bartel architect of this
rustic abode writes the love of the
country life seems to be innate in the
human breast man seeks large and
populous cities only by necessity
across the 19th century these pattern
books of rural houses proliferated in
England this is a plate from WF Pocock's
architectural designs for rustic
cottages and here's a design by Robert
Luger from his architectural sketches
for cottages rural drawings and villas
well the design took a variety of styles
the drawings all isolate the house in
nature like it's it's almost actually I
can't even think of a single case where
a house is rendered in relation to
another house it's always alone
sometimes to an absurd degree as in
design number one from pf' Robinson's
rural architecture of 1828 this is an
English pattern book it looks like an
alpine landscape that this house is
sitting in pattern book was also popular
in the u.s. in the nineteenth century as
was the ideal of the country house and
its concomitant benefits ajay downing
writing in 1847 states in the country we
believe in the bettering influence of
beautiful country houses and the
improvement of human nature necessarily
resulting to all classes from the
possession of lovely gardens and
fruitful orchards from the beginning
then the house standing alone in a
bucolic landscape became an inextricable
linked with the american dream and that
same image that same ideal i'll be it a
little bigger and a little brighter
retains its power today after the Great
Recession of 2008 I took a crack at
analyzing the American dream industrial
complex by rewriting REM cool houses
typical plan s a cool houses essay
published in SML Excel in 1993 was a
self-described meditation on the
American office building and by
extension the American City REMS early
obsession you know before the
countryside atypical plans my post
recession revision shifts the focus to
the American House and by extension than
not City as we typically understand it
as I flip through these spreads you'll
see on the left a series of contemporary
house plans all at the same scale from
some of the largest American builders
these are the plans from which freedom
land was built on the right I've edited
cool houses original text redacting
passages and inserting text to change
the subject and reframe the argument
you'll forgive me I hope as I read the
text and fold but it will give you a
chance to become familiar with the plans
one thing may be prefaced before I
reading and this is well I was gonna say
this is a slog it's not it's a joyous
celebration but you know REM makes the
case in typical plan that the office
building is the great achievements of
the chicago frame the office building
great achievement of American
architecture and that's true if one
understands it from a professional
perspective but if we look at sheer
numbers the single-family house could be
argued to be a great achievement just in
its ubiquity of American Building
production atypical plans are an
American fabrication there are 360
degree architecture architecture drunk
on an excess of space and resources they
belong to the new world the notion of
the atypical plan is disconcerting
it's the beginning in the end of
architectural history which is nothing
but the hysterical fetishization of the
prototypical plan atypical plans are
fragments of an acknowledged utopia of
Anne Frank maneuv an acknowledged utopia
promises of a glorious architectural
past and a post architectural future
from the mid 19th century to the early
21st century there's an American century
and a half in which a typical plans
developed from the English country house
with its ruthless creation of luxurious
domestic spaces of retreat through the
sheer multiplication of rooms via early
masterpieces of accumulation of space
like the Alden House of 1882 charles
morris Klotz house of 1969 and Robert AM
Stern zwarst
Westchester House of 1974 together they
represent evidence of the discovery and
subsequent mastery of a new soon-to-be
endlessly multiplied and publicly traded
architecture the ambition of atypical
plans is to create new territories for
the pleasurable and profitable unfolding
of old processes in this case idealized
accommodations for domestic activities
in an ownership society but what is
domesticity supposedly the most
primitive and circumscribed program
is actually the most modern and mutable
domesticity makes conflicting demands
the architects of a typical plan
understand the secret of the business of
domesticity the house represents the
first totally absorptive program it
demands a particular but not a specific
architecture its functions both to
distinguish its occupants existence and
signal their market participation
dwelling can invade any architecture
domesticity cannot within the
financially determined framework within
this financially determined framework a
typical plans generate marketable
character Vincent Scully one of its
greatest chroniclers define the atypical
plan and the dreams attached to it with
Riviere quote the massing has now become
complex and voluminous the interior
around its great fireplace is no longer
a colonial box but a very landscape of
its own it opens up at several levels
and pushes out to the porches green
shadowed pavilions of permissive
relaxation of summer stock assignation
x' among the cane chairs and the gliders
middle-class heaven with some dominant
with novels atypical plans provide
multiple physical and financial
platforms for the demise of
twentieth-century market democracy
atypical plans our architecture of the
not simply rectilinear any accumulation
of shapes can make them atypical even
squares they are products of a new world
where sights physical and financial are
made not found at their best they
acquire a formless iconicity they
represent the point where the home
through sheer economic in irrationality
and spatial inefficiency assumes an
almost mystical status atypical plans
are maximalism for the masses already
latent in the first exuberantly
non-utilitarian explorations by the end
of the era of atypical plans ie now the
non-utilitarian is refined as a sensuous
science of coordination oversized
columns massive multi-layered facades
coffered ceilings marble tiles accent
lighting luxurious bathroom fixtures
abundant electrical outlets hardwood
flooring artfully staged furniture
tasteful color schemes central
air-conditioning that transcends the
practical to emerge in a rarefied
existential domain of guilt-free
subjectivity you can never only be in a
typical plans
you can only act sleep eat make love and
hopefully refinance atypical plans are
deep wide and sprawling they've evolved
beyond the naive humanist assumption
that contact with the exterior so-called
reality is a necessary condition for
human happiness if that is true why
build it all and anyway aren't the
disadvantages of the exterior
disadvantages which the multiplication
of atypical plans have helped produced
ozone depleted carbo charged globally
heated by now well-established
mortgage-backed securities and mortgage
interest deductions which are the same
which are the seen akwonton of atypical
plans impose a regime of speculation
that defines invisible communities not
quite homogeneous segments of a market
borne collective channeled via
complicated calculus through real estate
mortgage investment conduits heroically
of the Equalists architects of atypical
plans effortlessly deliver generic
worlds of pure ego atypical plans are
American there are no equivalents in any
other country culture there the residue
of modern capitalism itself in the
ever-increasing dimension from income to
debt the hidden potential of credit they
proclaim the superiority of the luxury
of the artificial to the poverty of the
real which remains whether admitted or
not the true credo of American
civilization the source of its universal
attraction atypical plans have learned
what architecture could never admit that
the coordination of matter and desire is
at most postponed failure a temporary
rollback of the frontiers of economic
chaos atypical plans are not gritted not
absolute there rambling in elegance runs
counter to European platonic s-- a
moralistic system has designed a
moralistic system to measure misfit and
thus create unhappiness on the contrary
through the development of an anti
etiologic ideological device a
metaphysics of slack that gives an aura
of dignified authority to even the most
severely conflicted formal and stylistic
coexistence is they bestow the
appearance of a decorous conquest on the
essentially messy reasserting formality
from the most compromised Givens
atypical plans are not neutral they're
strangely anonymous there are places of
isolated worship more voluminous than
baroque churches they provide infinitely
greater space for congregant their
private 20th century chapels with a
shared doctrine of ever-increasing
equity
although the dominant emphasis of a
typical plans is on representation there
is plumbing elaborately deployed rather
than deny those residual features to me
that make humans animals still atypical
plans celebrate every bowel movement
every bath ingenious architectural
arrangements of miniature symmetries and
coordinated sight lines organize the
visual traffic creating a exalted realms
that have been normally impure zones of
the typical a typical plan these spaces
master baths and kitchens are the highly
visible sanctuaries for all those
primitive aspects upon whose inclusion
the correct unfolding of the business of
domesticity depends
a typical plans are to the resident but
the stage set is to the actor their
familiarity produced facilitates
performance event exchange appearance
disappearance failure success atypical
plans are relentlessly enabling
ennobling background atypical plans
demand repetition each instance is the
nth plan to be atypical there must be
many and articulated indeterminacy to be
atypical each must be conspicuously
undefined they require the presence of
many others somewhat similar plans but
at the same time suggest that each plan
is unique and that their exact number is
of no importance atypical plans time n
times n equals a suburban metropolis
hardly a reason to study architecture
but perhaps a reason to study economics
houses strung together by roads and
incomprehensible smoothness and
equations of incomprehensible complexity
each discrete welcomemat in Wall Street
transactions part of a never ending
edition we're getting to the end
hmm atypical plans threaten the myth of
the architect is Demi our enlightened
source of order and discipline as in the
scene of a crime the removal of all
signs of the perpetrator characterizes
the true atypical plan its authors form
an avant-garde of developers as erasers
its unsung and unnamed designers
labouring anonymously for the Toll
Brothers DR Horton KB home and a host of
others represent vanishing acts so
successful that is if they had never
appeared these architects transform
comfort into luxury creating aleatory
playgrounds interior Elysian Fields
accessible in anyone's lifetime ie the
American Dream in quantities millions of
acres that are no longer sadly
unimaginable securely entrenched in the
domain of Philistine ISM atypical plants
have obvious affinities with other
popular arts the sampling of familiar
yet distorted references has a jet the
focus-group generated quality it's the
equivalent of manufactured pop music
serial television greeting card poetry
assembly line art it is architecture as
affirmation atypical plans are as full
as possible of floor level changes of
layered views of volumes pressuring an
irregular perimeter and of a maximum of
materials all other architecture is
about reason and consistency order and
security atypical plans are about
passion the soothing of our insecurities
architecture is monstrous in the way in
which each choice leads to the reduction
of possibility it implies a regime of
either-or decisions often claustrophobic
even for the architect all of their
architecture preempts the future
atypical plans by making any choice
viable denies it entirely along with any
sense of the past keeping us forever in
the present the cumulative effect of all
this fullness this systematic commitment
to volume is paradoxically low-density
the typical American city is a brood
accumulation of atypical plans a vast
plain of incrementally planned
obsolescence hollowness is filled
could the spective house be the most
radical typology a kind of aamna type
defined by all the qualities that
documents aspire to all the most
delivered as the most delivered program
of the twenty late modern age its effect
is totalizing
atypical plans are the latest mutation
in a chain that has revolutionized the
urban condition concentrations of
atypical plans have produced the
suburban the subdivision picturesque
cluster accumulations of subdivisions
the only new urban condition exurbs
defined by sheer quantity of low-density
high-calorie matter rather than as a
specific formal configuration the
periphery is now universal and
everyplace defined by like-minded
indifference practically immune to late
local variation the atypical plan has
made the city unrecognizable and an
identifiable object atypical plans are a
quantum leap that provokes a conceptual
leap and abundance of content in
quantities that overwhelm are simply
preempt intellectual speculation what
delusion triggered the spread of
atypical plans where did the brawl start
was it their very apotheosis that turned
houses into real estate dwelling into
gambling
did plans with surpass surplus qualities
create men with outsized appetites were
the spaces of a typical plan the
incubators of the faithful followers of
geeks bearing formulas suddenly the
actor blamed the set for his lack of
character
if typical plan accommodated in
conspicuous production atypical plans
celebrate conspicuous consumption they
make most houses into individual
trophies filling the city with the
alarming assertions of millions of
environmentally disconnected yet
financially interdependent individual
mini Ecology's environments that seemed
seemingly demanded little and promised
everything we're suddenly seen as
infernal machines for stripping identity
and wealth
I'm gonna skip that one mm-hmm for
houses America multiplies typical plans
a typically using a model known since
the Renaissance the aristocratic palace
or manor house is there a connection
between the notorious individualism of
the American population and its sacred
cow the detached private residence the
American House is fat as fat as its
ground blanketing cumulative substance
is thin the American needs status in
space even though a simple extrapolation
of the square feet involved reveals that
this need will destroy the very
resources that reassure him of his
manifest destiny with the European
minimum dwelling assembles a critical
mass the American house inflates it
simply because things that happen in
houses are supposed to be good we like
our goodness and big doses there is
something almost insane and masochistic
about the utterly about the quantity of
utterly inferior substance that is
generated in the new world in the name
of achievement or in the name of
fulfillment if typical plans promise the
dream of mass produce collected dwelling
then atypical plans deliver the reality
of a mass customized collective debt
thank you for bearing with me through
that this drawing was done for the first
publication of a typical plans in
perspective quite a while ago and in
some ways the origin of Freedomland
entitled Alison's acres after Alison
Smithson sort of if we have patron
states in this lecture which I guess we
have a lot of she's the patron saint of
them--at building it's a study of a mat
subdivision composed exclusively with
houses sampled from the plan catalogs of
some of America's largest builders in
which the hidden and generally
unacknowledged interdependencies that
bind American houses together things
like gas subsidies mortgage-backed
securities all the hidden mechanisms
that actually make us truly collective
even though we don't want to acknowledge
it are made manifest in the overall
arrangements of the houses so basically
all the houses are connected the only
rule that I've followed was that the
garage doors needed to be accessible so
there are front doors that face either
front doors but it produces a kind of
continuous chain of dwelling
before moving on to Freedomland I'd like
to look back at some historical examples
of how we might live together a
collective dwelling that are worth
considering so if there's the earlier
history of the house hidden within that
there are also histories of proposals
about actually how we might come
together rather than standing apart in
her own little Eden's in an early
architectural treatise published before
Pilate owes for books another model of
the house as an aggregate of dwellings
was put forward in 1559 Jacques Android
is there so published the first volume
of his believed architect tool which
much in the manner of the later pattern
books of the 18th century provided
designs of dwellings for people of all
classes while each is essentially
presented as a single house of Chateau
the designs themselves are composed of
independent pavilions held together by
strong geometries and linked by courts
arcades and broad passages here's
another example the house composed of
pavilions ordered geometrically and
bound together by arcades courts and
passages here under the guidance it
seems that Pilate oh but I believe also
sir so is also a technique used by
LeDoux as we see here in a house for a
father and three children but here in
the Senate be likely designed in the
1780s it takes on a true collectivist
ambition LeDoux describes it as follows
sixteen families live together in the
calm of the woods they each had a
complete apartment all the needs of an
isolated life vegetable gardens often
for useful and medicinal plants orchards
meadows cultivated fields often reserved
for other reserved for pastures
vineyards wine presses services the
communal salon the dining room all the
accessories that ensure comfort and
convenience were brought together the
heads of the family governed by trusts
good example in feelings of piety
propagated the lessons of wisdom more
than any school of morality religion
attached to them the laws will attach
them to the laws of the country they
found in its consoling exercises sweet
and tranquil tranquil life surrounded by
all its virtues they had no idea of evil
that's all to do writing by the way
and closer to home in the United States
there were throughout the 19th century
and into the first years of the 20th
ideas proposed ideas proposals
experiments aimed at finding
alternatives to the suburban ideal the
French social social theorist charles
fourier was a major influence on many of
these american experiments in 1843
albert brisbane one of his american
disciples wrote quote the laws of
association discovered by fourier is the
social destiny of man it's the true and
natural system of society and will when
established upon are secure to him that
happiness for which he has long sought
in vain an association is an assemblage
of persons united voluntarily for the
purpose of directing their efforts
energies and talents tin the best way
for the happiness and elevation of the
whole atom got a big amount here's
another view of the full-on story
another for you his followers wrote in
1841 that quote when the earth shall be
covered with balances the poorest will
then enjoy eight hundred thousand
palaces much more agreeable than those
of Paris or Rome and looking a little
more carefully at the traditional
residential pattern books one sees that
the idea of several houses grouped
together has been studied by several of
the architects that there were in rural
and suburban ideal so these just a
couple of example of in fact like
multi-unit homes from the same books
that I was showing before so here's
James peacock design for a pinwheeling
for family home Joseph Gandhi's cluster
of workers cottages Gandy if you may
remember as john stones renderer for
lack of a better word and designs by PF
robertson robinson for collective
dwellings both grand and somewhat more
modest
and of course we have Robert Owens
magnificent palace as envisioned for New
Harmony
there are many American proposals for
model settlements in societies and many
books published describing them in
detail in 1915 Henry alaric of Omaha
Nebraska published his book modern
paradise an outline or story of how some
of the cultured people will probably
live work and organize in the near
future in it he writes that quote no
palace of any king was ever so grand so
healthful so convenient and so elevating
to the life and character of its
occupants as the co-operative mansion
that's the co-operative mansion which is
doesn't quite live up to the language
but you get the idea what's really
amazing about this book though it's in
the text that it outlines for the time a
radically equal society there were no
gender roles as related to the labor
required to the statement community were
in fact like explicitly spoken against
that everyone was was all roles were
were available to any member of the
community like many of the books of this
period it also had like shared child
rearing so it really decoupled labor
from from sex and gender which is pretty
radical and it's happening in Nebraska
that these being put forward and there
are many other books like this of course
though this is what we mostly know about
these experiments so I'm just gonna read
this sign which I think it's pretty
great the 4ei system so the lagrange
phalanx the 4ei system of commercial
communal living was attempted here
between 1843 and 1848 approximately 35
families lived by rules established in
councils of industry commerce justice
and education they're quote new social
order was a failure you know American
take on the whole attempt
still I don't think that these ambitions
for some type of more conscious
understanding of our interdependence as
people and as citizens and the search
they represent for alternative forms of
Association is something we should
consider dustbin of history and so we
come again to the birds and to the main
story of Atlas of another America
freedom land in which the object in view
is to unite in a better manner than as
hitherto had been done and with a taste
founded in our very nature with the
economy and utility American home so as
to combined architectural fitness with
picturesque effect in the service of
building communities connected to our
noble past and prepared for an uncertain
future so I've sort of slipped into
character as the crazy architect that's
design the thing I should like have a
wardrobe change but I don't have the
resources for such thing so I'm going to
read again a little bit from the
discourse of freedom land as I take you
through the project but you get a sense
here so freedom land is basically all of
the United States that was gridded as
part of the land ordinance of 1785 so
we're in freedom land now having been
required by the times to draw up a
detailed plan for the general
improvement of American housing in the
aftermath of the great financial crisis
and its effect upon our collective
confidence and in the in the correctness
of our living patterns I humbly submit
the following proposal for freedom land
you must oppose a level dry and fruitful
tract of land in some fine plain or
Valley that having been surveyed as part
of the great parceling of America
according to the method set forth in the
land ordinance of 1785 is continuously
gridded into square townships of six
miles per side each containing 36 one
square mile sections of 640 acres the
grid the framework for Thomas
Jefferson's vision of a rural Democratic
Society of citizen farmers but also a
great game board of rampant real-estate
speculation provides the underlying
structure for freedom land a new
settlement model that reconciles
resurgent dreams for an agrarian
urbanism with long habituated domestic
appetites it now being fully established
by learners persons and increasingly
acknowledged by laypeople
laypersons that our current settlement
patterns are both unlovely and
unsustainable freedom land is premise
down on the following irrefutable truths
that local farming is good being that it
provides better food and makes better
use of increasingly limited resources
than commercial agriculture that urban
living is also good improving as it does
the health happiness and prosperity of
the population and that the majority of
Americans the veracity of the above
notwithstanding still aspire to the
material and spatial luxuries
represented by the detached
single-family house as it is most
respondent respondent Lee found in the
suburbs the plan of freedom land results
from the subdivision of a typical survey
Township into force equal squares 3x3
miles the northwest and southeast
quadrants are established as new towns
and further subdivided into 36 square
sections the two remaining quadrants are
preserved in or if necessary restored to
their natural state as unencumbered
retreats for the pleasures of the town
people one survey Township thus divided
is the absolute minimum area necessary
for the establishment of freedom land if
this plan is aggregated to form a group
larger than a single 36 square mile
Township then a checkerboard layout
results in a like manner to that
proposed by mr. Jefferson producing at
the grand scale an alternating
arrangement of town and country there's
no maximum limit to such an aggregation
except for any geographical or political
obstacles that may arise to thwart the
just and proper extension of the
settlement by the townspeople the four
sections at the center of each town are
occupied by a civic core comprised of
the infrastructure necessary for the
maintenance and preservation of the
community whereas the original land
ordinance reserved section 16 at the
center of each Township for use for
education in freedom land it being
recognized that the choices and means
and methods of education are best left
to individual families the central
squares are rightly devoted to more
pressing and universal needs the way
square an ever growing manicured pyramid
of refuse rises slowly in section 16 the
water square a circular reservoir nearly
one-half mile in diameter occupies
section 15 the energy square are
forested 20 by 20 foot solar panels
powers the town from section 21 and the
Market Square and
in section 22 by a 10-acre big box of
community and commerce provides a venue
for public assembly as well as access to
those products and services not produced
through the prodigious industry of the
townspeople the 32 remaining sections
are quartered to form four equal parts
of 40 acres each 128 individual
neighborhood estates thus established
each and independent self-governing
community are further divided into four
ten acre squares of which three are
dedicated to agricultural pursuits while
the dwellings are located on the fourth
in this manner fully three-quarters of
every town in freedom land shall remain
open green and free of buildings each
neighborhood a state of freedom land is
comprised of between 8 and 64 houses all
within all those within any particular
state being one just like the next and
in this manner ensuring the cohesiveness
of identity and a consistency of
character such that property values are
protected and community values are
promoted
whereas architects have proven
themselves disinclined or perhaps just
ill prepared to deliver designs desired
by a majority of the American people the
houses in freedom land are built
according to the designs carefully
selected from among those produced by
the country's greatest builders designs
that have proven to be highly popular
with persons possessed of the most
discriminating taste and therefore a
certain to attract that the finest type
of citizen depending upon the number of
houses and then manner in which they are
arranged a neighborhood of houses may
take on the character of either a large
villa or a small village families thus
are able to select the estate that most
closely matches their spatial stylistic
and consequently social preferences
thereby affording them a life among
like-minded neighbors with a shared
sense of duty and purpose it being well
known that people by their very nature
are equally desirous of the pleasures of
novelty is they are needful of the
comforts of familiarity Freedomland
seeks to offer both in due time taking
advantage of the increasingly short
lifespan of our houses and in a manner
similar to crop rotation the entire
estate including the dwellings which are
dismantled and rebuilt rotates
counterclockwise every 20 years
completing a full rotation after 80
years
this has the positive effect of
providing each resident at regular
intervals with a new home that is
exactly the same as their old home as
each of state rotates this has the
further beneficial consequence of
producing an ever-changing prospect of
built in open space throughout the town
so here you see 0 20 40 60 in the same
quadrant it's hoped that this
description concise is that though maybe
is sufficient to describe the sublime
structure of Freedomland its natural and
rightful connection to the foundational
principles of our great country and its
superiority to our current modes of
settlement so now I'll just take you on
a quick tour through freedom land the
book
Tod's flipping through the book right
here has a lot of planned drawings and
then some views of what life might be
like in freedom land and the the views
as you can tell and from the previous
images basically I'm collaging in
renderings from Home Builders into these
mostly historic land historical
landscape paintings sometimes not
landscape paintings using paintings
where the copyright is is no longer
active so I wouldn't get in trouble my
publishers are really like made me stick
to that but the paintings are a way to
actually sort of imagine you know so
freedom in itself is is clearly
satirical trying to take up to sort of
Jeffersonian ideas and Hamiltonian ideas
and you know they want we want to be
close but we want to have space all
these conflicting desires and like how
do you roll those up and do a proposal
and the language that the material I
just read is sort of probing that those
conflicting ambitions the images are
used to sort of try to map in a kind of
the ideal and then the reality that
might begin to take place as it does in
any society or any scheme any utopia of
a kind of you know
let's say a kind of disenchantment with
what with what this scheme brings
forward but so here who begin rather
sweetly I think a traveler approaches
approaches Elysian Fields on the edge of
freedom land and then you know labor
people hard at work building their
community one of freedom land citizen
farmers working their state at smileys
acres sometimes things get a little
weird in freedom lands these estates are
really easily also converted into kind
of you know cult compound so we have an
awkward moment at plots to Pope family
takes a voluntary stroll near Exodus
landing at Shadrach woods
mr. and mrs. Andrews relax with their
dog and his gun while the romance begins
at Blithedale hall the Shepherd tends to
reflect but there's a labor dispute at
the palace of Don B and while a crowd
gathers at Fourier forest may be
revolution is at hand and workers mother
feels that as Chateau the very
self-satisfied architects of freedom
land survey their creation from
parallelogram Park
in 2007 Tina was invited to exhibit
Freedomland at the Chicago Architecture
biennial rather than present the
drawings I made a wallpaper the
monuments of another America depicting
life in and around the estates of
freedom land modeled on Xavier Mathers
1814 scenic wallpaper the monuments of
Paris the other reason I decide to make
a wallpaper is they gave me a really
narrow corridor that was 60 feet long
and like eight feet wide so after I got
over being like sad about having this
hallway I figured I'd make good use of
it and so this is just a video of the
wallpaper so I guess twice as high as it
would have been in place so essentially
what you're looking at is just a kind of
elevation of Freedomland imagined I
guess in some ways that you're looking
across the Mississippi maybe at freedom
land unfolding in front of you
and there's lots of little Easter eggs
when this thing is when it's full scale
in front of you there's Thomas Jefferson
peering lecherously a milkmaid lots of
little goodies giraffes and other things
Alex of another America closes with a
very short story new homes for America
which I will read it's very short so
working feverishly through the night on
a new assignment the architects shuffled
through the company's catalogue of home
plans searching for the perfect profiles
the right balance of expression and
order internal embellishment and
external massing huddled over the
machine she made copy after copy
mirroring the plans as she went clipping
away a bit here and a chunk there and
then matching it to its inverted
neighbor she was on a deadline her
employer wanted something new something
bigger something better for all those
empty nesters who's grown children were
returning all those new expanded
families but not something too new they
told her work with what we have they
said we know how to build these things
she remembered laughing derisively under
her breath when the HR rep reading aloud
from the latest sales brochure described
the company's trademark design method
life design to the new recruits remember
you're not just designing houses you're
designing lives because as the boss says
life design blends the fundamentals of
design architecture engineering physics
psychology and sociology to create a
house that looks better and lives better
than all the rest at the time it sounded
absolutely absurd but now she got it and
now as their houses grew ever longer and
more elaborate she laughed aloud with
glee as she imagined the fantastic new
lives that would unfold along their
length as day broke she stood up and
stepped back from the table exhausted
she surveyed her creations and she was
happy then it's struck her her houses
needed names the company always named
their plans and they always use names
that through association lend prestige
to their product there were the plans
named after Italian cities the Vicenza
the Roma the pleat the PISA the Milano
or famous artists or sometimes
architects the
the Renoir the van Gogh the Pilate Oh or
the founding fathers the Washington the
Hamilton the Franklin the Jefferson the
names rarely had anything to do with the
actual design though occasionally a
design resembling Mount Vernon might be
called the Mount Vernon she realized
that she wanted her houses to have names
that were meaningful names in with
history names that spoke to her wild
aspirations for the lives of those who
would eat and drink and laugh and cry
and love and hate in them then it came
to her at the meeting later that morning
she presented the fruits of her Labor's
the Owen the 4ei the Buckingham and the
ladoo she could tell by the look on her
boss's face that she wasn't going to be
around much longer new homes for America
is a work of architectural fiction
obviously maybe one could call it a work
of fictional analysis in the project the
underlying logic of a single-family
house is upended as house connects to
house and unexpected but not
inconceivable ways the precision used in
the drawings aims to foreground the
strange possibility that this fiction
might in fact become it might in fact
come to pass in this regard new homes
for America questions not only how we
live now but more importantly how we
might transform that way of living going
forward the key operation the
multiplication of single units into
larger collective wholes appends the
conventional rules of the suburban house
the underlying logics we see in six
typical plans run amok in houses like
the Yellin
the result is an emergence of spaces of
shared living along and across the newly
expansive interior as the legible
boundaries between individual dwellings
dissolve the seemingly inconceivable in
the existing context of American
patterns of inhabitation the design
suggested other domestic futures other
forms of fulfillment might be hidden in
plain sight masked by familiar suburban
forms that we are so quick to dismiss so
if you'll allow me to have a little more
time actually okay my time this last bit
it's like 10 minutes
so this is so since we can't be in New
York for Countryside the future we're
here in Ohio for a fulfillment the
future right which is pretty exciting
so I'll close by reading an opinion
piece that I wrote for the architects
newspaper maybe about a year and a half
ago or two years ago and well this is
not the original title if I had thought
at the time this would have been a great
title for it and it's a company by an
ongoing project useless plans for
surplus people which is the Xeroxes I
have down in the show down the hall that
I started while I was at the American
Academy supposedly working on the
origins of the suburban house in Rome
but this was more fun to do so the
images plans pictures slogans that
you'll see as I read don't correspond
directly to the text but they do offer a
reflection on some of the ideas of the
text the plans once again called and
reworked from developer home plans
staged relationships between individuals
as a way of thinking about how
architecture might direct us toward a
reflection upon our mutual
interdependence think of them as temples
of mutual human understanding the
photographs are a collection of shots I
took while in Rome of churches but also
of interiors and the labor human and
machine that makes leisure possible and
finally the slogans or variations of
signs that I saw in many churches that
spoke to me of the need to see each
other as partners and caregivers before
I get into the slideshow in the reading
I'll give you a little sort of
behind-the-scenes look at how these
plans were made so we start with I don't
even remember this let's say this is a
kb home it probably is a KB home
basically identify this 45-degree chunk
isolated mirror it mirror that mirror
that and all of a sudden this thing
relatively undistinguished takes on a
kind of order that for me I was seeing
actually as it kind of and they're
totally functionalist like I was very
careful there's no bathrooms no kitchens
ever appear in these things there's no
there's no program per se but they as
I'm working on them now they staged
relationships that one could imagine
relationships between you know two
individuals for individuals eight
individuals it's really working on a
kind of primary operations of
architecture as it stages and
coordinates people in relation to one
another in what I'm thinking most highly
about myself
just infrequent I imagine it's like
Hajduk working on the Texas houses in a
way
[Laughter]
so now don't worry this is it's it's
it's nine minutes I tell you but there's
like 115 slides are gonna pass the
screen while I read every about every
five seconds so now a reflection on life
after work
Americans define themselves through work
it builds character so we believe the
American Dream is premise taun
individual achievement with the promise
that our labor will be rewarded and
measured by the things that we collect
and consume for many the scenic wonton
of that dream our greatest collectible
is a single-family house of all of our
products it's the one we most rely upon
to represent our aspirations and
achievements throughout the history of
our republic the idea promoted from the
beginning by the likes of Thomas
Jefferson heir to Pilate oh and father
of the American suburban ideal of living
in a free-standing house in the middle
of one's own personal Eden has been the
dream of generation after generation so
while it was possible for Luke Corbusier
to say in Paris near the beginning of
the last century that a house is a
machine for living from our perspective
on this side of the Atlantic and on this
side of the 20th century it would be
better to append that Maxim a house is a
machine for living the American dream at
this point in history this statement
seems entirely self-evident but still we
are reminded by our leaders to get our
piece of the dream in promoting his
vision of an ownership society in a
speech at the st. Paul African Methodist
Episcopal Church in Atlanta in 2002
President George Bush said I do believe
in the American dream owning a home is
part of that dream
it just is right here in America if you
own your own home you're realizing the
American dream and during the early
years of the new century the economy
soared as millions of wood-frame dreams
sprang up across the country enabled by
an elaborate new financial calculus but
then the magic formulas which scripted
the construction and consumption of ever
larger houses in ever-increasing numbers
by bundling together dreams into
tradable units began to fail the dream
quickly became a nightmare as
legitimating environmental economic and
socio-political narratives that for so
long sustained the endless reproduction
of suburbia began to collapse it became
clear that the suburban house
than manifesting our achievements massed
our delusions according to the historian
John Archer the romanticized isolation
of the individual or nuclear family in a
manufactured Arcadian Preserve is an
increasingly untenable fiction the myth
that we all stand alone propelled by our
own initiative and hard work is part of
that fiction suburbs and the detached
single-family houses of which they're
comprised reinforce it they work to
isolate and separate us to dislocate us
as individuals detached from any larger
heterogeneous collective the common
cul-de-sac is both literally and
symbolically and ended the road a
terminus safely sequestered within its
four or eight or 16 or 32 walls we stand
apart from the crowd reaching out
through an array of devices to make
contact with those who are more or less
just like us
space becomes less a medium in which we
mix and more a barrier that insulates us
from those who are unlike ourselves and
as houses balloon in size this sense of
disconnection is amplified within the
walls of the house itself with each
inhabitant withdrawing to evermore far
flung in insular private realms the
social and political consequences of
this withdrawal are increasingly obvious
in the deterioration of civil society
and the erosion of civil discourse the
further we live from each other the less
we are capable of seeing each other as
people with shared dreams and struggles
and more likely we are to see the sea
and other unlike us and we fear and
demonize the evidence of this is clear
in the election of Donald Trump whose
campaign of intersectional xenophobia
claimed the most votes in the United
States suburbs small cities in rural
areas as our houses spread out as the
distance between us increases we vote
more myopically to protect our own
perceived interest and the interest of
those we see as like us at the expense
of what is arguably the greater
collective good but is the detached
house with its resulting social
detachment a prerequisite of the
American dream is it possible to imagine
other futures for the dream and
consequently other futures for dwelling
what would happen if personal happiness
were no longer so closely tied to
economic success derived from the fruits
of one's labor these are questions we
would do well to consider jobs are
disappearing and while precise presently
most of us still need and may even want
to sell our labor it's becoming and
clearer increasingly that with each
someday there will be only fewer buyers
our relationship to work and therefore
to the American Dream and therefore to
our manner of dwelling and therefore the
politics is changing according to the
network theorists get love ink and the
political activist Franco Berardi the
capitalist promise of full employment
turned out to be a dystopia there is
simply not enough work for everyone
zero work is the tendency and we should
get prepared for it which is not so bad
if social expectations change and if we
accept the fact the prospect that will
work less and we'll have time to think
about life art education pleasure love
and what have you rather than solely
about profit and growth our current
world is built on a foundation of profit
and growth our urbanism and the
infrastructure and architecture with
which it's constructed including the
tens of thousands of million tens of
millions of homes spread thin across the
landscape is the result of a
centuries-old economic system and that
system has consistently sought to
segregate sites of labour and production
from sites of dwelling the single family
house is in a suburban bedroom community
along a congested commuter route is the
product of a capitalist system in which
we head out each day to sell our labor
between an indifferent market returning
at night full as night falls to
replenish our energies and reclaim our
identity as the market for labor
decreases an increasingly automated
world we need to replenish now we need
to begin thinking about the consequences
and benefits of a future with that work
or more accurately with far less
wage-earning work even now we can see
that the shift is occurring the recent
collapse of the distinction between
places of work and living is both a
symptom of the underlying economic and
technological transformations that are
reshaping work as we know it and a sign
that points towards other ways of
dwelling out of necessity in many cases
desire people are beginning to
experiment with other ways of living
coming together to form new or new again
types of shared lived work households
and as this tendency toward zero work
increases we will need to rethink the
way we live because if we take the
classical definition of work out of the
equation the whole structure of our
cities as well as our manner of living
makes a lot less sense already this
probability is leading economists
technologists and political scientists
but sadly few politicians on either
left or the right guess andrew yang is
trying to get in there to speculate on
the structure of society in the future
the key question is how people will
sustain themselves without jobs there
are nude calls for universal basic
income by tech leaders like Elon Musk or
Universal basic dividend suggested by
Greek economist and politician Yanis
varoufakis Bill Gates has even suggested
that we tax robots in any case a new
economic model which will necessarily be
accompanied by a new political order in
which you are freed from the obligation
to sell our labor in order to survive
will require that we consider other
conceptions of human productivity other
forms of human association and of course
other ways of living in such a future
the American Dream as it's currently
defined would have no utility but how
would we organize our lives in a world
where we work less what would we do how
would we live in as sa work the
historian James Livingston points toward
an answer when he says when he asked how
would human nature change as the
aristocratic privilege of leisure
becomes the birthright of all as
architects seeking a way forward we
might ask a different version of
Livingston's question how would human
habitats change as the privilege of
leisure becomes the birthright of all
liberated from the idea that our
dwellings are must be understood as
freestanding castles as isolated
retreats from society through which we
represent our individualism and secure
our market share we could instead
conceive of assemblages of dwellings
that collectively define a domain of
mutual cooperation interaction and civil
discourse we have counter histories of
dwellings that offer us guidance in
thinking about other possible domestic
orders in 1886 jean-baptiste go down the
French industrialist wrote that quote
when constructed with the view to unity
of purpose and interest the homes like
the people approach each other stand
solidly together and form a vast pile in
which all the resources the builders art
contribute to best answer the needs of
families and individuals and following
this we might also allow ourselves to
imagine as a way of shaking off the dust
of the 20th century living in what
social reformer Robert Owen described as
quote a magnificent palace containing
within itself the advantages of a
metropolis a university in a country
residence without any of their
disadvantages placing within the reach
of its inhabitants arrangements far
superior
to any known and yet possessed by the
most favored individuals in any age or
country of course the American Dream
can't be transformed overnight there are
aspects of it that are deeply embedded
in our collective consciousness at its
core the dream is about security comfort
and familiarity as much as it is about
aspiration accomplishment and status and
any new ideas about the way we live if
they are dislodged if they are to
dislodge us from our long habituated
connection to the single-family detached
house must be accompanied by new
architectural models and delivered
through compelling new narratives that
situate the needs and desires currently
manifest in the house within the
patterns within new patterns that make
collective life more desirable this may
seem to be yet another call for a utopia
and therefore criticizes being divorced
from the real and pressing concerns of
the world it's not for as Lewis Mumford
said the prospects of architecture are
not divorced from the prospects of the
community if man is created as the
legends say and the images of the God in
the image of the gods his buildings are
done in the image of his own mind and
his own institutions the real world is
changing rapidly all around us meanwhile
we cling to increasingly outmoded dreams
in the future if we hope not only to
survive but to thrive we'll need to
change our minds and rethink our
institutions we'll have to prioritize
community as much as we currently
prioritize individuality
we'll have to decide to live together
we'll need new dreams thank you
[Applause]
you
