[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
I'm not here actually
[Applause]
[Music]
I think I might say that sounds elitist
or Eastern
is really strange
coming into this build and this place
which I love
two things happened in a new place the
first thing was so and a person
people know how upset to know that
they're transgender people walking
around
[Music]
[Music]
a little bit
[Music]
I want to include that love from Ohio
State and I want to say that we are
better for it and I think the students
who come from Ohio State so I want to
apply
the national championship
[Music]
anyway I wanted to do something that
does
I know architects are supposed to chefs
lines so I'm gonna show the latest live
I have a project in building now for six
or seven years
[Music]
that I see in architecture I would like
to say that first of all I started
teaching and started my architecture
work and in the sixties the home of the
multidisciplinary
very fashionable
it's spread
[Music]
architecture
philosophy and science and architecture
always and I believe that that
architecture the culture the rather
culture should look to park there
celebrate our protection question
senator like we did the possibilities
are
[Music]
how
well my students are doing is this
intersection between the problematic
[Music]
there were sixteen men dressed in tunics
and headdresses like they look like
Egyptian servants let's say
my cost of going there were 16 men that
had holes on their shoulder and on their
shoulder was a platform they were airing
and on that platform was hole Prost the
Nazi architects model of the house of
German a model that must be at least 30
feet by 20 feet
it was an amazing model that had to be
carried by 16 men and what that showed
to me was how important architecture was
at personal level on the side
with architecture was I suppose that
I've never seen a president in this
country perhaps except Thomas Jefferson
was
[Music]
the driver and architectures
[Music]
I asked my students what
ooh
and they said oh it's great and all
those it's going to be absolutely and
this is the six hundred million dollar
Commission to do I said how come we
ain't teaching Gothic architecture here
how come you don't want to learn about
architecture and it was some and all my
students want to do is tap teaches how
to do saw
so the designer
Norma Carson president said
when asked about why 19th Ave he
answered it was the appropriate
architecture that I feel and they are
points that for me are important and I
want to share them with you and in fact
there are six
five summers top five don't say 86
76 but if I didn't assist one here Udall
said five points
[Music]
point one concerns the possibility of
architecture in our media culture the
media has invaded every aspect of our
lives is difficult to walk down the
street or standing in crowded elevator
cameron people as far as in a big city
speaking into cell phones that voices is
if anyone else is around
i arose from under my apartment building
in new york we get on the 17th floor
there because come on the 15th floor and
then immediately they check their
placard or they start talking on their
cell phone I think why did they do that
before they got the elevator it seems
something about being in elevators when
people want
my plug in their earphones etcetera
amazing they have and it absolutely
changes the culture of being in an
elevator where people getting their
iPhones provide instant messaging email
news music now the iPhone provides
instant messaging and all that stuff but
it provides you as if you were attached
to a computer that's the problem and
it's the real world turned into a
virtual world the less and less people
are able to be in the real physical
world I mean in architecture without the
support of the virtual world so that
we're becoming less and less necessary
as architects providing physical support
for our work
this is what about a situation in which
people have lost the capacity also in
terms of time to focus for any length of
time this is apartment because media to
the figures time in discrete segments
focus is conditioned by a long month in
watch something before there is an
advertisement in newspapers stories keep
getting shorter the condensed version is
available on the Internet
so the world layering of information we
all fall victim to we get the condensed
version of books sales of books and
magazines continue to define and this
please for me - a corruption of what we
think of as communication with a
corresponding loss to read or write
correct sentences no this was written
before the nomination for Vice President
[Music]
myself while irrelevant information
multiplies while I am win irrelevant
information
multiplies communication diminishes if
architecture is a form of media it is a
weak one now to combat this over
reliance on other media's architectures
have to resort to more of a more
spectacular images shapes generated
through digital process become built
icons values as they are infinitely
varied and of course the new idea of
parametric processes leads wanted to ask
many many questions forget Photoshop and
Rhino
cetra the
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
I said wow these forms he's making look
at these things it could be a museum a
Shinto shrine building something simply
I think maybe should be symbolic says
what
[Music]
what we do you hold our set up so that
if you're a good tear through this wall
with balls bouncing they go into the
harbor
[Music]
ladies and clearly there's another
question that parametric's will
influence our grades this kind of
thinking into architecture number two
the corollary to this prevalent media
culture is that the viewing subject in
all days you know students would write
the least thing the only thing I can
think of that would
activity that all of you have is if I
were the commander-in-chief of this
country and said we're going to
institute the draft
tomorrow for all of you that are not in
ROTC you will be in the army three days
after you graduate as I was you would
all very much less it's the only thing I
can think of
back in do some form of energy into a
generation that can't help this
passivity and it's more and more that
you become passive if you don't realize
it the more you demand more stimulation
in other words if I'm not performing
well enough some of you already Congress
lead cetera in other words you demand
more and more active energized
participate startling visual and aural
information in a state of pensive 'ti
people demand things that are easily and
we have all become all of us consume the
more passive people become the more they
are presented by the media with supposed
and opportunities to exercise choice way
after the presidential debates with
voice what you feel and you
you can say a down etc we're all voting
on stuff that's totally irrelevant what
we think we're participating when in
fact we're being loved into a further
stage of activity by this air sighs
false level of participation
[Music]
what news story we want to hear we look
for what popular song we want American
Idol is an example of this this double
charade for me is a very another form of
sedation because voting is irrelevant it
is only the byproduct of a hyper
mediated culture it is part of the
attempt to make the public believe that
they are participating when in fact
they're becoming more acid students have
also I believe are more passive than
students of the past the fact to those
students to act the protest for against
anything is rather possible they'd
rather have a sense
[Music]
this to get me there the student and
workers protesting for temple 1968 for
China's involvement see impossible today
and particularly for the last seven
years we had a government which has
[Music]
essentially state of Anhui people feel
they can do little to bring about change
with the war interact with our draining
of our economy there is still a
possibility in this country that
the party responsible for today's
conditions will be early reelected will
the same consequences this festivity the
activity of us to allow a a continuation
of employment government is directly
related to architecture in that one of
festivities most insidious forms is the
computer the architects used to draw by
hand logical shades and shadows select
respective learning how to draw for me
what one begins to understand not only
one of us liked to draw
Palladio or interview CA but also the
extent of the differences in their work
and for me you can't be an architect
after sitting at a computer in some 250
person office and acting with lines on a
computer do not especially
the organization you're not thinking of
what I call the party you can't do
parties my computer control and a party
is a kind of diagram idea and to me that
no amount of Maya rhino or 3d studio
Photoshop going to take that and what's
interesting is what I find in my my
students are they're very proficient at
the instruments that they have to use
that they have no capacity to understand
how do they bring them into play to make
architecture to me what a drawing did
what a wall section of Palladio did that
felt different to the hand to the eye
and the mind than one bite or puke or
you see a he said the differences were
about ideas want to learn to make a plan
with a computer one does not
conceptualize
they say hey we want to get jobs why
studying Eladio is going to help me get
a job and they're right it is in fact
when an interview for getting a job the
implication even at an elite institution
like Yale is if it's not going to help
me get a job I don't want to do it and I
think that is a pervasive and insidious
problem that I think our schools gonna
take consideration that in fact the
world out there is demanding and
especially that's a State University
architects
[Music]
the fact that architecture has a dip
disciplinary history seems to be
unimportant to what these students are
thinking in a liberal capitalistic
market driven society getting a job
matters and for many students it is the
only reason that they are in school yet
education does not help him get a job in
fact the better you are Photoshop or
more attractive you become an anomaly if
I asked a student today to make a party
which I do my students avoid by design
studio I should say
but for me when I say make a party a
diagram or a plan that shows an idea of
ability in other words when I say we're
doing a Nazi documentation center
what is the architectural idea that is
going to be operative in the into thing
I don't want you to show me lay out of
this material situation because what we
have to go back to the beginning and say
did it matter to borrow me know or some
Evo two great churches didn't matter we
know or the celebrants felt about the
mass in these places you'd be worried
about lead certificates for
sustainability about they seem to
sustain himself very wealth over four
centuries do we know what the client
as a fascist or not clearly we don't
care the history of architecture has not
been made a lead certificate sustainable
building in fact some of the worst
buildings I know are done by architects
who practice under the name because they
can't design they give you a lead
certificate so much for the history of
art I suggest that they go to Armenia
and bar being conceptualized as an idea
has nothing to do with the liturgy he
can make conceptual offices an idea
between the column of the wall and a
continuous idea of service as opposed to
in charities Palazzo who July or August
Andre article audio said to forum he
tries to transform architecture and us
the Liturgy of the church into some
other condition that is produced an
architectural idea of a building to me
that's why we're in school and that's
why our teachers and that's why
architecture could matter point for the
computer is able to
now when I say that we have these
spectacular images but these icons have
little meaning a relationship to what I
call things in the real world it was an
American pregnant pragmatist philosopher
siesta first the beginning of the
century who called for three categories
of signs icons symbols and innocence the
icon was a sign and architecture that a
visual likeness to its object a simple
and an agreed-upon meaning for example
Robert venturi famous
categorizing buildings as odd duck or
decorating said cast the difference in
architecture between an icon and a
simple in architectural terms a duck is
a building that looks like it's object
the jury's terms of place themselves
Ducks taking shape the duck this visual
similitude produces what person and icon
which can be understood at first glance
venture is not the term the decorated
shed refers to a public facade for what
amounts to a generic box like building
the decorated shed is in purses terms a
symbol which has been agreed upon
conventional classical decide symbolizes
a public building whether it is a bank
of library
today the shapes of buildings because
[Music]
they may not look like anything or they
may only example the processes ie the
algorithms that maybe in this case they
do not relate how to live for anyway
these are icons that have little meaning
before words there is no reason to ask
our more famous architects why does
something look like this there is no
answer to this question because why is
the wrong question today why because the
computer can produce it one could ask
these are architects also why is this a
better one of these which one of the
crumpled paper buildings is better which
one is the best and why the answers are
problematic because there is little
value system for judging because there
is little relationship between the image
produced the icon and anything
external to it these icons with our that
is one of my colleagues mario parkour
and architectural critic and historian
is written article or thinking from out
alphabets to algorithms he suggests that
in order to understand algorithms one
has to switch from thinking notationally
as in an optimist to thinking
algorithmic is what uses algorithm
computer algorithms in the same manner
what uses a three dimensional notational
system one fails to understand the logic
of the new technology so one is not
condemning the new technology
they drink to it the possibility of a
whole new thought system that reflects
back into architecture in other words we
cannot think notationally but
algorithmically when we are asked to
work on such equipment
25 it brings us to what I consider to
another problem that I face in some of
your teachers face but you may not face
today and that is find ourselves in
Edwards ie a late philosopher wrote a
book on late stock describes in that
book lateness as a moment in time when
there are many paradox or know who
ideological cultural little conditions
that cause lateness can be understood as
an historical moment as an eternal
search for words make which may contain
the possibility of a new future paradigm
for example there were reasons in the
late 19th century for architecture to
change these included
psychology introduced by Freud and
physics with Einstein in mathematics
with iceberg and flight with the right
way there was a movement from the
mechanical ear of the 19th century to
another more complex condition of the
world these changes which Kurt took
place in the late 19th century caused
the reaction against Victorian and
imperial empirical styles of that period
and articulated the new paradigm
monitors in each historical style you
will find if you go back in history an
early phase which in modernism was from
1914 39 the homepage which of modernism
occurred when it was accepted by capital
from 1954 to 68 and then a period of
opposition for mannerism where one
struggles against that paradigm this is
what follow the watersheds on the
the events of 1968 1968 saw an internal
and blouson revolution one that revolted
against the institution's representing
this was followed by post-modernism
eclectic returning to the language that
seemed that the deconstructivist
architecture exhibition at the Museum of
Modern Art in 1988 1988 put an end to
this cliched and pitch divert but that
was the 1988 we're not 20 years old you
cannot return to the if there's no
cultural condition that promotes this
kind of so there is ultimately a
relationship between architecture and
culture between the discipline itself
and the cultural conditions that are
influenced by the district therefore I
will argue that we are not in an AHA bar
or a Mannerist moment but in for moment
which side he calls a late start a
period where there is no new paradigm in
which one tries to find a way to produce
work without
according to either a Mannerist a high
or a as it were a digested form of
matter computation is a possibility to
produce a shift from notational form to
digital form but in itself it's not an
imperative the question remains what
happens when one reaches the end of an
historical cycle and beginning a middle
and a mannerism and then nothing late
style describes this moment that you all
face I believe before there is a shift
to a new paradigm a moment not of faith
or openness but one that contains the
possibility of looking at a late style
for the possibility of the new and the
transformative science cites in his book
late style
Beethoven's thesis ulemas written at the
end of Beethoven's career when the
composer was responding from the seeming
impossibility of innovation instead and
our society says Beethoven wrote a
thesis that was difficult anarchic even
that could not be easily understood
because it was
mystic and milling style Bake Ovens
later works ID says is an example of the
complexity ambivalence and
undecidability that characterizes a lake
style these few notes or hard to suggest
that this is not while everyone many of
us want to be outlined are looking into
the old into architectures of discipline
in anyone's history may be one way to
deal with today for me late style has an
analogy in literature in Thomas
Pynchon's most recent book against the
day his story begins in 1893 set at the
Chicago World's Fair the great white
city which was conceived at the time has
an image of the future so this is in a
sense a book is all about an analogy
comparing 2006 with 1893 and suggesting
that what seems to be the future became
the past really but at the possibility
of the future but we realize it in a way
because of the way
look at so he said that the white city
was conceived as an image of the future
but instead it's possible buildings was
an architectural conservatism it
represented the end of an era
Pynchon purposely sets his books in the
late 19th century to demonstrate that
this is that it was a late moment in
history but that there were stirrings of
a future that remained unable to be
known or seen by us in the way people
thought of what it meant the future he
can't pictures this with young people
flying around this fantasy spacecraft
that had never really existed at the
time but that he imagined to exist at
the Chicago fair these stood for the
possibility of a useful youthful
transformation of the world looking not
at the classical architecture but
elsewhere for its new possibilities
against the day for me is a powerful of
your position in the world as I see it
it is the possibility of not looking at
what is supposed to be the new and
relevant in culture but rather looking
into the discipline and stuff like
Beethoven did to see what other
possibilities there are that night what
agencies is the fact that there is going
to be a different form of infrastructure
transportation and different form of
thought that would intent eventually
transform the world and that its
beginnings are apparent in the strangest
of places that in moments of ladies
these few words that I sang to you today
are merely to provoke you to suggest
that no we're not
no I can't teach you answers to the
future the past or even today yes I know
you all yearn to be on my part as I did
but I understood that I was following
from people like a 4pc a road and all I
could be was a Mannerist rather than an
original artist and I believe that it's
possible to look at the conditions that
we find around us both in the past and
the present into our own disciplines and
into its history as a way to begin to
accept today the possibility at fiction
saw and as other architects of their
time sought as a way to deal with the
future with that I'm going to show some
images
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
the project is to encourage tourism to a
region where in fact there is
a religious tourism today the government
centers one of the few religious
pilgrimage sites in the world as a
matter of fact it has the third most
number of tourists to st. Peter's and
one other
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
okay I started thinking about this
project because it is
a necropolis in an area and we turn to
the kinds of constructs in history that
immediately come to mind and the
Parthenon and the Acropolis is one now I
must confess something that I never used
this slide until I was in a this is
architecture and very noble statement
and then he shows the second slide shows
Frank Gehry's Los Angeles matzo ball and
he says this is not
shows a building by John Hurt's on
another one of his friends this is the
spot architecture got about a whole list
of people he asked me in there
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
which is a complex and buildings and the
whole idea for us was to try and find a
way to take from a single building which
is a symmetrical building and reach out
into the city in the landscapes and to
create in a sense a complex of mega
buildings it does something to the urban
environment that the single building may
not do X please
there you see it in its context the
starting with the single building the
symmetrical center with the circle
within the square and then how these
buildings reach out into the landscape
next week this is a famous example the
Komodo leo
46 or 47 this was done apparently in a
sense the rain the very short reign of
over six is the fifth who decided that
one needed to make a series of points in
the city fabric which was medieval at
the time that allowed me to understand
where the religious places were like the
Piazza in front of st. Peter's the
Piazza del Popolo the Piazza Santa Maria
Maggiore
the Spanish Steps and the compa doneÃ¶
was the first urban project of the
secular nature this was the place where
the secular government of occupied a
very prominent point in the city with
these three buildings they are just off
the axis of the Corsa which is nuts here
which runs from the piazza del popolo
down to the great Victor Emmanuel
monument and of course the lesson for
architecture is that that's not
necessarily max your buildings create
places in the city and of course the
comparison
here in the fidelity of Michelangelo
please study their contracts next here
is the escort yacht in Spain bill
shortly after Michelangelo he started as
a church building and that the library
and then residence for charles ii this
was the model that the president of the
region of Galicia said that he felt like
he was mike charles ii charles ii sat in
a chair on this inside somewhere over
here to watch the the building of this
project which is not completed before
his death and my client said that he
quietly chair to sit on the hillside to
watch the union is a sporty op x please
this again a very important object and
in its urban implications this is the
awkward the Imperial residence in in
Vienna which is a Serie of complex of
buildings which continue to grow and
modify the city and you get all kinds of
things is a symmetrical
here with an axis over here and a propyl
a here series of axes that are and deny
as the operator spread in the thirteenth
century to the 20th century it's one of
the great examples of how a series of
buildings can begin to define urban
space next please and the last one of
these complexes which I think both show
you the good of the bag of this is the
Getty circles by Richard Meier attempt
by single architect to make a structure
of difference in our vanity and so
realizing the positive and negative
points of this we undertook this city of
culture this six building project in
Santiago
next please here you can see the project
and its present state of construction to
tell you this is an archive building
here this is a local national library
this is a cultural history this is a
research center and then there two
buildings starting up here this one the
Opera House and a an International Art
Center to show you the scale of this
project this is an arena 12,000 people
this which seems to be dwarfed by these
buildings the buildings are maybe in
five hundred thousand square feet could
recover
not to mention all of the
rest of the project next please this is
the competition model which we say it in
fact is the hillside what we realized
was this project was recognized as a
response to Frank Gehry's Guggenheim
Museum which was an individual building
which brought tourists to Bilbao but
some all of the energy out of Bilbao
what we wanted was a building complex
the did look like a series of buildings
but was a filter that is a series of
passages before pilgrims on their way to
the actual Church of Santiago that this
will be a member
mountainside eight two bodies massive so
what we did was to come to top of them
outside and rebuild it as buildings
looking like the mountainside with these
passing passengers here is the kind of
diagram that we sent me which shows and
the Cartesian grid the topological grid
in the medieval grids of the city of
Santiago
this was a strategy purposely intended
to be antique monumental ante Bilbao and
she figured Brown was to work and in
fact and was yelling project that did
this everybody else did these fantastic
six building complexes and we did this
sort of dumb model that didn't look like
these are the diagrams that we made this
is a diagram of the old city of both of
its routes through the medieval city we
took these developments routes and place
them on the top of the mountain side
we then deformed those pilgrimage routes
by the topographical energy so that we
had a trace of the original rooms and
the topography of the land pushing the
actual imprints up and then using the
computer we had a series of topological
vectors that and entered into the
structure and finally the Cartesian grid
so we had the medieval the topographical
the topological and the Cartesian all
superpose on top of one another to make
a complex and as for illegible reading
in other words we wanted the
impossibility of saying well that's the
whole town
that's the demography or that's the
computer or less you wanted all those
possibilities simultaneously that's what
makes it a late work next there's the
psych lab with the medieval roots in
Brown going through all the way down to
the town so this is a a filter a
transition that
to our idea of the wax from Saturday
from 17th and fraternity bro you have to
walk through the Wexner Center
he didn't have to ever know what you
knew was there and that was a purposeful
Jack and I know that president being has
his football lunches at the Wexner
Center which is you know you have
culture and football at the same time we
hear you have religion and art you don't
have to go into the arc but you know
it's next place we then wanted to make
this project as contextual in terms of
material and idea of spaces as without
the images and being merely
the arcades in the building next these
are the building stone a redstone Sita
quartzite we used it in a a Cartesian
manor houses typical of the region you
can see that please this is the egg of
the central square which uses these
three different kinds of stone with the
Cartesian grid into the stonework and
here we see
Cartesian grid and the different stuff
in the closet actually one of the things
that's characteristic don't delete yet
is it rings a lot and so in the
building's the dairies are these last
al-khatib overhangs to try and get more
light into the building's weakness of
the of the climate and so the all of our
project the glass and the building's all
for two now and several different layers
trying to catch as much light as we can
and articulate the facade next and this
is one of my favorites because this is
the solid on the harbor or La Colonia
port city of alleviate space
and here's a picture
and here in the city this is the same
building seen from above
next please
the same building before it's tile
roofing we built a regular roof
I've written structure so that you can
have all the stats the exhaust system
air conditioning anything you want the
time the room but the will not show this
and we just have this hall the local
scope so it look like a natural
enhancement next week and there you can
see the reserve center with its
Cartesian grid cut into the various
local stone and the History Museum in
the background is very stunning to come
up and see this building it seems to
warp and twist and have no stability at
all as you move around the next place
and there's the site the archive
building the library buildings the
building we just saw they the research
center and the history
these are interior of the library
building with this three layer glass
facade next from the glass facade and an
upper level here to this level down to
the rare books phone so there's a kind
of sectional continuity for me which is
very important that is not a single
level but is a certain special
down below next and here you can see it
now more finished form the this is the
interior glass facade the exterior glass
facade the second level and then down to
this lower level next next and you can
see here this lower level of the section
and looking back through to the archive
building next this is the scale of the
space and again this very complex facade
and interior facade this is several
facades of the History Museum the next
the sectional drawing next and the
diagram that allows all of the lines of
the typology the top topography and the
Cartesian bridge to inflect
upon the all of the lemons
the horizontal and vertical levels of
the project accident I show these
consist of the last reason there's a
[Music]
virtual reality of sort of walking nine
which is for being quite interesting
we've never done that able to do it
before
[Music]
the interior space of the archive
building next next
[Music]
I wanted to say something about these
two towers my friend John medic who was
an ardent Catholic and poems about
Santiago design two towers for Santiago
they were to be symbolic of a rest
facade of a church without a body and he
was as it were at the time when he
designed his dying
[Music]
and who's one of the five architects a
very close friend and on his deathbed I
promised him I would build this body
that he was about to lose symbolic
what's wonderful about these are his
actual from his action to the lights if
we stand over here and look through
these two towers we train them so that
you see the actual West facade of the
cathedral of santiago so that when if
codes are walking down here they stop
this question saw without a body they
see the actual body in the history of
Santiago next please
this is the facade next and you can see
it does
