professor of architecture at the Milton
School of Architecture at the Ohio State
University it is my privilege to welcome
all of you to the first lecture of the
2019 2020
Baumer lecture series our thanks to Eric
Herman assistant professor of
architecture who's the chair of the
series and who has assembled a brilliant
collection of speakers for us this turn
and whose graphic acumen has developed a
vibrant arresting yellow banner that
announces our speakers with a cannot
miss clarity but it is once a situates
as well as playful it sets the tone for
the fall semester speakers a series of
speakers who range from the conceptual
to the infrastructure all of the
disciplines within the school are
represented in this cast of
intellectuals designers historians and
theorists and we are looking forward to
an engaging semester occasionally we are
privileged to include a speaker who does
not quite fit into any of the specific
disciplinary definitions of landscape
architecture or city and regional
planning but instead is an agent who
forecasts new definitions of objects
institutions practices and protocols
that shape space our interpretation of
history and public engagements and so it
is my pleasure to introduce Jeffrey
Schnapp as the first speaker in this
year's series Jeffrey is the founder and
faculty director of Harvard University's
Medill lab a group which I have been
with fangirl enthusiasm for several
years which is an idea foundry knowledge
design lab and production studio
experimenting in the networked arts and
humanities publications from Medellin
range from hyper cities and thick
mapping to media play books for
rethinking libraries beyond the physical
book and to blueprints for radical
pedagogical the range of thinkers and
projects brought together under
Jeffrey's enthusiasm is both compelling
and clarifying the meta maps projects
infuse traditional modes of academic
inquiry with an enterprising spirit of
hacking making and creative research in
addition to the medlab
Jeffrey is faculty co-found co-director
of the Berkman Center for Internet and
Society
Jeffrey currently holds joint
appointments between the Faculty of Arts
and Sciences where he is a professor
within comparative literature as well as
of Romance languages and literature's
serving as the section leader for
Italian and is on the teaching faculty
in the architecture department at the
Graduate School of Design augmenting his
already a very busy academic career
Jeffrey is also one of the founders
former CEO and now chief visionary
officer of piaggio fast forward a group
which designs lightweight intelligent
mobility solutions for people and goods
in collaboration with Gregory lens and
many others the company designs robotic
suitcases as was described in fact that
we need a girl
today which resemble what I think is a
cross between rody which is my
two-year-old nephews favorite bouncy
inflatable Italian donkey toy and a
Roomba
this exhaustive list of appointments
accolades accomplishments and
affiliations points to a unique and
productive mind Jeffry works in the
domains of media knowledge design
digital arts and humanities and
curatorial practice and is list of
publications exhibitions and awards is
impressive it's hard to point to any one
thing that Jeffery does but rather a
collection of activities provocations
and transformations within the realms of
cultural history design and curation
not just a cross-disciplinary thinker
but in agent who forecasts the projects
Jeffrey initiates between academia
curation and design practice transform
the ways we engage history objects and
institutions that shape culture please
join me in welcoming Jeff Krishna
[Applause]
but it's one that hopefully will provide
a little bit of context for the hack
that I'm going to wear in the context of
this talk which is very much focused on
the the question of the the present and
future of mobility which is to say the
hat that I wear as one of the cofounders
of a new mobility company called Piazza
fast forward as the name Joe Joe
probably elicits in your imagination
it's a new company that it is connected
to 135 year old company company that's
known throughout the world for iconic
vehicles like the Vespa scooter but also
for other light mobility vectors love
moto Guzzi motorcycles and Aprilia
motorcycles
Europe's largest two-wheel manufacturer
and what I really like to talk about is
what I'm calling a move ability here and
I'll give a little a few words of
explanation about the choice of word but
really not so much a product that the
way in which an invention the product of
device embodies a set of values that cut
right to the core of what I see is
really fundamental question it's not
questions that are resolvable by mere
technicians or specialists when we talk
about ability we tend to think of it as
to be in the context of discussions
about rationalizing traffic flows and so
forth its belonging to some kind of
well-defined sector of expertise but
mobility really and this is now me
speaking as the cultural historian
really cuts to the core of everything
that we are as a society as a culture we
are the way we move from the sense of
cultures are defined as well as
subjectivity are defined by these
features so when one enters the world of
developing new kinds of mobility models
one is an activity that spirals out in a
multitude of different directions and
the reflection that I want to commit to
you but maybe actually start with the
word move ability which I swear to you
is not a word that I made up actually
it's a way
by training and practices and historian
with linguistic orientation when I find
words that are suggested I find it hard
to give them up on the occasion of the
130th anniversary of the foundation of
the piaggio group agree that it has done
long before it produced Vespa scooters
build trains it will they built ships
they were the major aircraft
manufacturer they were the number two
aircraft manufacturing in the interwar
period I came across this word in
conversations about events and publicity
and the challenge that really elicited
the forging of this word it was a
geologist and an Italian was how do we
capture this kind of exciting you know
kind of bubbly new model of the way
people are moving around the world
that's emerging around the Gustloff
scooter Vespa scooters were born in 1926
they were the creation of aircraft
engineers who hated motorcycles and were
forced to give up their the love of
their actions was to build copters and
aircraft they didn't wanna make land
make this but
Rose were a mess people didn't have
money in their pockets they weren't
ready to their word everyone novelties
and even if there were they have been
able to afford them so what was the way
the Italians ordinary middle-class
working-class attempts were going to
move around the pockmark landscape
reportedly that was the challenge that
the design team the team of aeronautical
engineers who developed the vespa
tackled and they created a vehicle that
took off right from the moment it was
launched in 46 and started doing things
with Vespas that were not anticipated in
the design the design was supposed to
resolve a series of practical problems
they used them as sofas on main squares
to hang out they in all kinds of ways
that suggested that a new way of moving
around the world a new mobility mobility
lifestyles but emerging ability the turn
of ability was used to identify that
kind of catalytic effect of a light
mobility platform on culture on society
defy here in the context of this
discussion of the this evening is what
comes after mobility the kind of
mobility that's defined the world that
humanity has inhabited at least since
the middle of the 20th century but
during much in the quarter century
what comes after autumn mobility and
what I'm going to argue it somewhat
politically so is that this kind of
endless discussion about the future of
mobility is centered on self-driving the
Mars is exactly the vision
wait and the work we're doing together
with us for revising attempt to kind of
further their null terminated a division
it's an alternative in the speak we
confused by a vision of the kinds of
cities that we think are the cities that
we desire not the cities where the
protagonists will continue to be the
automobile so the five chapters of this
presentation first of all going to focus
on the city the way in which the climate
model ability to use to define urban
design today the earth and how they
diverged from sipping on some historical
models then I'm going to briefly to talk
about the alternative nation that I'm
associating with the notion of mobility
and I should mention that when I
discovered this word I as part of the
book project that came out of the
research I was doing I remember best
movability manifesto so good if you
transform is in response to the sort of
vision of the future that was
articulated in the people to modulate
these finding manifest for future is
we're visited there any dreams of the
hero of the future which is the 20th
century century we just went beyond is
going to be the man behind the wheel now
there's not the Podesta sense supported
by by the structure and design of cities
and many guys wet for better or for
worse
what are the consequences of that
briefly about the robotic vehicle that
you see here a mobile carrier Cheeta
Cheeta means a short trip Italian
reporter pleasurable trip the limits of
autonomous driving technology the limits
of autonomous vehicles why is it that
despite the hype cycle that's been going
on now for over a day focus entirely on
a vision to the future where our driving
vehicles the last section of my talk
which will take a fact achieved and to
mobility
to suggest the whole question of
autonomy needs to be re-entered refocus
tournaments have looked at from a
different angle and they discover I'm
not the enemy
I'm not opposed to these technologies on
the contrary I'm extremely interested in
committed but in the service of watch
and approve those are the questions that
I'm interested in
okay all right so let me start as a kind
of preface with a Latin phrase which I
doubt it's going to be familiar to many
of you but you might be familiar with
the phrase which takes us back to the
17th century to a debate a polemic that
took place for those of you who studied
[Music]
which is at the center of remaining
parts discourse on method responded to
the de cartes claim the
there is we produce knowledge and
consent of course he was engaged with
polenta but he was making a point that
it is a book it actually happens to be
true from an evolutionary step the fact
that we have a particularly in a
structure there are brings besides that
they are there are sensory apparatus
works to enough and the brain is paired
with all the other sensory systems his
entire mission
but perhaps is not complete surprise to
them that all the great forms of
philosophical inquiry that shaped the
Western tradition that's taken
particularly the West the so called
Peripatetic school is the school where
philosophers walked they talked to penny
a new thing our closely and deeply
correlated and of course the way that
people move changes over the course of
time the course of development of
different transportation systems
[Music]
[Music]
bicycles etc all of those different
possible ways of enhancing enhancing and
augmenting human mobility have
profoundly shaped our interactions with
the world but at the core of all of
those forms of movement was always
walking it remains so today just as much
as it was the case
[Music]
well how the CDs respond reflect this
diversity of different ways of moving
around the world well all the way
through into well into the 20th century
what's the same as you can see here uh
we're different kinds of ways whether
it's parks whether it's animals moving
alongside payments along with this is
the model of urban life that continues
to be dominant throughout the world here
we are we've zoomed forward from pure
daisies Rome to San Francisco
[Music]
which cars are moving and other similar
platforms so that was the and we also
gave up a certain sense of connection
between the places people were the
places this is a model this is a model
that was still in London occupy the
whole center of GM pavilion and this
the major creators tomorrow and today
the end of World War two and the 1960s
this is the great period as certain
kinds of models of development took
place it really asserted one value above
all and that is the absolute centrality
of the automobile as the vector that
unifies always so these are the cities
that we live in today to some degree
they're all the legacy of this vision
which was a very powerful vision they're
in a transformative revision but we know
the consequences of it we know how this
Romans in the road of this world
superheroes of the future where the
speed of crossing major metropolitan
areas has been flat for the last 32
years aircraft
it's not the story that Marion was
promised that was not the vision of
Proverbs that Bill Gates and others were
proclaiming and of course the
consequences of this model of the
Ottoman the environment are literally
sacrificed our cities on the altar of
autumn ability it suffice us to know the
fact that in most urban areas the
percentage of territory can be a
disordered movement of vehicles is close
to one that's the world's most valuable
[Music]
we have to I think ask ourselves and of
course at the level of individuals at
the level of society the consequences of
this
[Music]
far before in time so we played that to
face the consequences of these choices
on multiple fronts so this is the
context in which on the occasion of the
book that I was writing aqua to retrace
the history they asked some of these
basic questions of values where does
mobility take us how does it transport
us how does it bring us pleasure how
does it reinforce the values that we
think are fundamental for the kinds of
cities not that we live in but that we
would like to live in that contribute
the quality of life to the values that
we think are essential and in doing this
of course I was explicitly thinking
about
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
for fondly different and so the work
that piaggio fast forward is doing
really in SS tries to align itself with
the DNA of these moments where the
answer to the question of what the
future of mobility isn't more
dislocation between places of work more
separation more enclosure of individuals
in their little boxes and their little
cages as they move around the space but
rather some alternative so one interview
you told me a moment embodies the notion
of
[Music]
and what does she do it carries up to up
traces with it it's a power source
increase so just carrying things turns
out to be actually a very significant
obstacle
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
is one we need to also think about what
typology of the vehicles will lead that
that characterizes the mobility models
of the future so jitta is just the first
to these kinds of vehicles we're
developing a whole family of them the
idea is this is a vehicle for people
it's a vehicle that will condition the
mobility choices that people make that
is all yes practically problems but also
have a magical element to an element
that will surprise that will delight
that will add a kind of qualitative
vector that's essential to the
successful adoption of new technologies
so jitta which is a following robot is
hardly the first beautiful
[Music]
we'll then will eventuate in the car and
remote cars and so forth is a process
that has a long long history this is not
a new set of technologies or a new set
of challenges and obviously in the
history of the development of these
clients about vehicles a lot of huge
technological release have been carried
out especially during the course of the
last years
[Music]
integrated tracking systems and all of
these technologies have gotten us much
much closer to being able to develop
plausible reliable and robust systems
for navigating the complexities of
roadway systems except there's a problem
exactly a common problem you're looking
at that problem
to be an extremely frequent scenario
when you look at what happens to in Nik
Euler accidents because the software's
driving
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
interaction that are easy to reduce to
abstract principles rules laws they have
it has trouble which is to say that the
more you keep people away from the world
of autonomous mobility the better
autonomous mobility does this is the
kind of problem that that that
self-driving cars have a big a real big
problem an extreme iteration of a
problem that becomes a very key
navigational problem for
[Music]
[Music]
when you're trying to codify the world
into consistency and there's other
problems that are connected to
so these are perfect examples of the
rigidity that characterizes the system
so we have to make up through
these products are can be addressed
technically you can upgrade the software
there's a lot of things you can do but
there's a deeper problem even than that
and that is problem that was called
attention to by this
this experiment the moral machine
experiment which was published just in
the last year in science and it's it's a
familiar problem to moral philosophy
it's a problem that's been
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
and certainly deserve to fulfill and
finish their lives without being
unloaded down by an automobile so big
surprise to engineers but nomination
caught off the blockers and to spend the
students of human culture
there is a much higher
[Music]
deserve different ways of emphasizing
the correct answer so to come back to
tomorrow night this dream of future
cities which is this rapid forecast the
future of that city
notice the complete absence of human
beings also notice that in order to
implement this vision of the smart city
these intelligent self-driving cars and
the real challenges to get let's say
that right now this is soon well I think
as you've been guessing we have to turn
humans into passing taxi machine we have
to
it's not surprising it's a low
probability but I think it tells you
something about the
[Music]
[Music]
straining to do things through crowded
spaces assistance system where it also
poses real challenges for machines to
understand that's the focus of a lot of
the work we've been doing and we're
calling it autonomy for humans as you
can imagine it's a little bit of a kind
of recapturing the world of tawny world
autonomy and connecting it especially to
the economy that's the most fundamental
to human being and to human history
which is in the most pure possible sense
so what do vehicles like like chica do
this is a prototype version that you're
seeing we're testing in the streets of
Los Angeles they are
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
and as you know gather experience
because I saw quite a number
[Music]
two models that have been emerging over
the course of the last couple of decades
especially perfect sense that we see all
his features emerging a strong
connection between indoors and outdoors
and that doesn't imply that mobile
devices go away that screens screens go
away or connectivity goes away it's a
it's a question of so Americans and most
people will come up with lots of reasons
but guess what out of that 80% only
wasn't that claiming with these to be
predisposed the law turned into walking
as a choice and I think you know some of
the answers to that question people know
that walking is good for exercise it's
helpful their doctors are telling them
neighborhood walks have all kinds of
positive contributions to the quality of
life assess from a number of different
standpoints and the correlation between
walking and bicycling
a typical example of the consequences
and you know short trips that kind of
neighborhood scalability contributes to
not only environmental well-being but
also to a reinforcing of civic bonds and
so forth so people are making choices
and there are reasons for those choices
of course so our focus has been on
trying to create vehicles that use
machine intelligence to the degree that
is intelligence to understand the rules
places that humans move around
pedestrian etiquette and that's an
incredibly complex task as it turns out
and Gina is a vehicle that uses a series
of sensing capabilities much particular
emphasis on pedestrian space or similar
concept tasks but of course it doesn't
see the world the way that you see the
world it has a fundamentally different
cognitive it's not that we have to
become competent pedestrians and last
but not least I want to just mention of
course that the world of mobility is not
open
we ate but it won't rust these new
categories and vehicles they're part of
a larger cities of today curb cuts are
great but if you can't transport two
bags of groceries and by the way I've
never seen a wheelchair that transports
too bad right so these are supports can
also expand the compass of mobility and
extend mobility to sectors of the
population that are not well served by
the automobile centric model I'm going
to close here with another manifesto
this is an animated one and after that
we can open up a discussion okay let me
see if I can
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]
yeah
[Music]
we're features
address
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
with the integration of all these
drivers and we already have suitcases
and we have already all of these
sidewalks and metal and extraneous
materials the RT growing like disposal
problems we have so much
problem
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
yeah
[Music]
we saw it is see it's awesome the photos
designed another look at the walls all
the time
alpacas fuel sources ha super super
interested just inside the complexity of
the way
[Music]
responsibly find some questions it
comforts
[Music]
so maybe you just get away from
you know
well they do disturb things excruciating
to perform certain tasks I speed they
also support
choices
[Music]
pleasure
[Music]
and they do it kind of microscale had
initiative technical department storage
engine and I wonder
begotten looking at sharing I think you
can see that one of the defining drive-
Janice and all of these noodles was to
make them unpleasurable
vehicles networks
the to the adoption sometimes electric
scooters recently immigrated for a bunch
of reasons we decided to focus initially
on the consumer market we thought it was
[Music]
they you need Virginia geotechnical
change when you unbox it it's a social
object
[Music]
where
walls
but you know we wristband
Oh
[Music]
Oh
[Music]
that's part of
[Music]
[Music]
right
yes
[Music]
it's an accident
[Music]
we kind of work you know a time
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
cheetah agency at Aristoteles with it
coming under the Packers
[Music]
[Applause]
