so you know it's funny we were just
sitting down here kind of chatting about
not reading or reading or how much
reading it is I'm about to read you
something and I will warn you I didn't
finish it so it's gonna have a
mysterious ending so I'm I'm glad to see
the really full room today I suspect
that's because our guest tonight has
drawn colleagues from other buildings
across this cold cold campus so
particularly for those who have come
from elsewhere thanks for coming out so
for you all I guess I'm Todd Gannon I'm
the head of the architecture program
here at the Knowlton School and I'm
really super happy to welcome Caroline
Lavine this year's Baumer distinguished
Visiting presser professor to the
lectern tonight
Caroline comes to us from Cornell where
she's the David and Kathleen Ryan
professor of the humanities she holds a
degree in complet from Princeton and a
PhD in English from Birkbeck College at
the University of London prior to
Cornell she's taught she was a professor
and chair of the English department at
the University of Wisconsin Madison and
before that taught at Rutgers and Wake
Forest University's she wrote her first
book on suspense at 19th century
literature in 2003 and and at this point
you're probably wondering what the hell
she's doing here speaking at the
architecture school she may still be
wondering this but we had a really great
session today with our graduate students
and I would say part of his me I read
her book and I really liked it and I
thought she should come but and I do
think that you know the main reason has
to not just one but her last two books
provoking democracy of 2007 and her
award-winning more recent book forms of
2015 in provoking democracy Caroline
flips that familiar claimed avant-garde
artists often rely on the freedoms
afforded them by democratic states
so you can't be avant-garde if you'd
aren't protected by the state in some
way but she flips that to make a much
less obvious and I would argue more
important claim that democracies
themselves need not just allow or
support or tolerate but need challenging
avant-garde art to propel the cause of
freedom in forms she develops her
thinking on these topics and on the
relationship between cultural production
and political justice by making another
seemingly counterintuitive claim that
formalism that long ago discredited
close reading those long ago discredited
close reading tactics associated with
the new critics of the first half of the
20th century might be recuperated as a
method not only for gaining insight into
current literary texts but also for
provoking meaning meaningful social
change through literary and cultural
criticism now the lessons that these
books have to teach us extend well
beyond the district boundary boundaries
of literary studies and that's really
the reason that I felt it was very
important for her to come here like
Caroline we architects landscape
architects and regional planners have a
vested interest in the relationship
between artistic production and social
justice and if you don't you should and
the formulas techniques of close reading
detailed description and careful
attention to complex organizational
structure the kind of stuff that we do
every day in the seminars are the same
kinds of tricks and tricks is not the
right word but it's the same set of
methodological techniques that Caroline
deploys in her book and so really in a
sense the kind of literary expertise
that we'll see tonight and the
Disciplinary
expertise that we kind of attempt to
conjure in this building I really cut
from the same methodological cloth so I
started to kind of lay out a whole kind
of exposition of the relationship of
architecture literature and formalism
and the history of the school as part of
that
and we ran long with the seminars today
I didn't get a chance to finish it it's
probably for the best it would have
taken a long time I may I'll write it as
an essay or something sometime
but the end of the day I would say even
though Caroline's coming from another
field I think she really speaks the same
language that we speak and so she may be
trained as a victorious but she's she's
a formalist by disposition and an
activist at heart and I think those are
the qualities that you should be paying
attention to tonight and so with that
please help me welcome Caroline Levine I
really am so moved and flattered and
thrilled to be speaking in a way so far
outside of my usual wheelhouse and I do
hope that there's lots of productive
discussion that we can have some of what
I'm gonna present to you is guesswork
about what we might have to talk about
together some of it is my own recent
work that I'm trying to think through
and would love your help in continuing
to think about in productive ways across
fields so I started by asking the
question what happens when someone who's
trained to study novels and poems stands
up in front of a roomful of people who
know how to design buildings and cities
and I started to think about what kinds
of crossings and harmonies and ruptures
and maybe rifts we might make possible
here but my own deepest intuition which
is what Todd has pointed to and I think
is right is that we share that is
literary studies and those who practice
and study architecture we share a
commitment to thinking about what I've
been calling forms that is the work of
imposing shapes patterns and
arrangements the materials we organize
are of course very different on the one
hand spaces on the other hand words
but both writers and architects deal
most fundamentally in form in working
the flux and chaos of the world into
various kinds of order now this might
seem like such a basic and general claim
that it risks being banal don't most
human endeavors from engineering to
music to finance and follow the
imposition of order and my answer is yes
I think they all do but I don't think
this is banal I think it might have some
pretty significant consequences that we
think across these many disciplines
these many ways of working and thinking
if we think form across all of them we
might be able to work together in new
kinds of ways so I want to suggest that
something important might happen that
when we notice that across so many
fields within the University and outside
scholars as well as practitioners
humanists as well as scientists
designers as well as politicians are all
working in this common medium of form so
I want to talk about two reasons two
major reasons to focus on form today
the first has to do with politics I
think we have a shared responsibility to
think about how all kinds of forms from
urban spaces to labor laws to sitcoms
produce the arrangements that govern the
ways we live together what the Greeks
called the polis and the word that we
get our own term politics from when it
comes to politics I'm gonna focus
particularly on sustainability which I
think of as the most urgent problem of
collective life that's facing us now how
do we live together in the palace and I
understand a bunch of you third-year
students are working on that problem
also the second big reason to pay
attention to form has to do with how we
in the university understand both the
possibilities and the limits of the
knowledge that we generate so I want to
make a case for a particular version of
interdisciplinarity one that focuses
this is us especially on the limits of
the forums that we study and use not
just on their possibilities but also on
their limitations okay
so the talk today has three parts the
first is a general set of questions
about politics inform why we should
think about the relations between
politics and form then I'm going to
focus in on sustainability as a problem
and project and finally I'll turn to
interdisciplinarity so first why should
we think about form as a political
matter I want to start with a really
broad political claim and that's the
claim that the value that is most often
motivated major political movements over
the past many decades in the US and
around many parts of the world has been
freedom it's a value shared by right
left and center although they certainly
define what they mean by freedom very
differently in these different parts of
the political spectrum but certainly
since 1968 if not before both the right
in the left who shared a desire to free
people from the power of the state the
official power of government on the Left
which is where I stand myself and so I'm
gonna focus most today although I do
want to think about the question of
freedom across the political spectrum
but I am myself interested in certain
versions of social justice that belong
very much to the left but on the left to
be political has often meant to resist
the status quo to fight against
oppressive institutions that preserve
all kinds of powerful hierarchies so
leftist refused social and sexual norms
and boundaries they want to free people
to experiment with new kinds of selves
and relationships I think how radicals
have celebrated terms and this is
especially in the Academy but also
sometimes outside like liminality
rupture break excess
resistance openness singularity and anti
normativity these are all terms that are
about breaking with the status quo about
rupturing experience as we know it so
radical thinkers across schools of
thought in the arts and the humanities
from post structuralism to post
colonialism to queer theory have been
seen their goal their basic aim as the
unsettling of dominant structures and
arrangements they want to cross
boundaries and resist categories for the
French political philosopher Jacques
Rossi err only the disturbance counts as
what he calls politics anything that
settles things back into order he calls
the police so and there's a very
definite value judgement between those
two disturbances good the police is bad
we don't have to look far to see the
impulse to disruption and negation on
the right also right wingers have long
fought for government deregulation and
free markets and trumpism is nothing if
not a smashing of norms and rules and
the formal work of governance even
centrists will agree that they're
protecting first and foremost the kinds
of freedom enshrined in the US
Constitution and especially in the bill
of rights freedom from tyranny freedom
of speech and assembly freedom to pursue
one's own beliefs and values without
intervention by the state all right left
right center freedom is so taken for
granted that I think we don't even see
it often for what it is which is one
value among others I'm going to make the
unfashionable claim here that across the
political spectrum across right left and
center we've been making too much of
freedom we've been thinking of politics
only as turn and resistance and negation
and what's important for my purposes
here is that I see this impulse of
freedom as first and foremost a
resistance to form to order
and I think the anti formalist impulse
is preventing us from building the
social worlds that we may actually
really want so in my research Todd
mentioned called forums i define forum
in a very deliberately broad way as any
shaper configuration
any arrangement of elements any ordering
or patterning and politics as I
understood it in that book and still
understand it depends on forms so
political power operates through spatial
containers and boundaries like
nation-states and domestic walls so we
have constant arguments in the public
sphere about who belongs where do
working-class crowds belong in the
public square do women belong in voting
booths but politics isn't only about
organizing or imposing four months space
it's also about organizing time so think
about prison terms naturalization
periods and the legal age for voting
rights military service and sexual
consent we know too that politics means
enforcing hierarchies white and black
masculine and feminine straight and
queer so if you take these together my
claim is that the political involves
activities of ordering patterning and
shaping politics is all about
distributions and arrangements or maybe
to put this in a slightly clearer way
politics is the work of giving form to
collective life
now it's certainly true that many
political forms including racial
hierarchies and national borders are
oppressive and violence and it's because
of forms like these that so many
thinkers have pushed for breaking forms
all together especially lots of radical
thinkers they say all forms should be
resisted the implicit logic goes
something like this
if forms are intrinsically constraining
and if we understand politics as
disruption then we must smash and
unsettle forms wherever we find them or
to put this in my own terms the embrace
of freedom as the primary political
value has brought with it a deep anti
formalism so my claim is that the dream
of freedom from all forms of order is at
the heart of most political movements in
the US and many around the world today a
kind of deep libertarian impulse that is
shared across certainly many on the
right and the left but here's the thing
that bothers me
I think this impulse to freedom goes
against something we also know about
living in common which is that
collectives always entail forms of
social organization humans as a species
have always been interdependent we've
always needed to figure out how to live
in groups we've always had to figure out
how to organize and distribute resources
and practices including the shared labor
of maintaining and reproducing bodies
including the production and preparation
of food care for infants the ill and the
elderly and arrangements of space for
shelter and gathering no human community
has ever been free from orders or
arrangements so if there could be no
politics no collective life without
orders and arrangements but this means
that the goal of politics cannot be
freedom from form a working politics has
to involve understanding deploying and
designing orders and arrangements
in my own recent book on forum I spent a
lot of time thinking about how forms
collide disrupting and REE routing one
another
now I'm starting to see this as very
much in the spirit of so much other
political work that's been concerned
with subversion and resistance the
project of freedom that is how to
unsettle forms so recently I've been
wondering what a leftist politics of
social justice would look like if we saw
our main tasks not as smashing and
resisting oppressive forms but as
designing and building political orders
we wouldn't be trying to do away with
constraints but instead and here I think
architects are some of the people who do
this best we would be thinking about how
we must always work with and through and
inside constraints we would think about
whether some Arrangements some
distributions of space and time and
resources are more likely to afford
justice and equality than others what
forms could we imagine design and build
that would give shape to adjust society
so this is to put architecture at the
center of the question of politics this
brings me to the second part of the talk
which considered concerns excuse me the
question of sustainability in this
moment of climate crisis when disruption
and unpredictability are the terrifying
new norm I've gotten particularly
interested in political and social
forums that would be focused on
preserving and sustaining collective
life over the long term so well for a
long time the left has been focused on
radical change on taking apart
oppressive structures what climate
change is made suddenly clear is that
now it's really urgent to preserve and
stabilize conservation is certainly not
only for conservatives actually
conservatism is not only for
conservatives either anymore I also want
to broaden the leftist definition of
sustainability beyond environmental
values alone so I care very much about
environmental sustainability but I want
to think about sustainability as a term
that encompasses a lot of different ways
of sustaining political collective life
over time
so sustainability refers to the general
task of maintaining collective life over
generations over time to come this could
mean envisioning lasting systemic
alternatives to current inequalities
such as ongoing wealth redistribution
job security food security and reliable
shelter for all for the poor and the
vulnerable security and stability are
often crucial goods desiring shelter
right Susan Freeman is not necessarily
conservative either Freeman reads a
passage near the end of stone butch
blues a novel about a working-class
transgender protagonist who creates a
home after a long period of homelessness
she paints cleans buys linens and bath
soaps at a department store critics are
typically written off home decorating as
weakly feminine and consumerist but
Freeman urges us to see justice
homemaking as a crucial piece of the
struggle to survive quote an audacious
effort to produce a basic sense of
physical and psychic security by someone
who's been repeatedly violated who is
never in her life felt truly safe so
taking my cue from Kramer Freeman I want
to recognize first the psychic and
social costs of demolition that is
insecurity violence loss and fear that
is what comes along with smashing
existing forms and from that point I
want to begin to imagine how we might
nurture stable just forms of collective
life for the long term
since most leftists have been focused on
the disruption of the status quo I think
we haven't developed good tools for
understanding how things last over time
our most common explanation is ideology
a system of beliefs and values keeps
things in place but how does that last
how does an ideology stay in place how
is it that certain ideas practices and
organizations manage to last across
generations while others fade or crumble
it's very clear that some social
arrangements do last they do have
staying power white supremacy and
patriarchy are particularly sticky
they've lasted well after they've
stopped being official institutions
they're still organizing the fabric of
our ordinary lives so this has become a
question for me why do some orders and
arrangements why do some value systems
stick around it's clear that some orders
and arrangements are likely to last when
they take robust material shape like
buildings and roads but here is my own
developing hypothesis less substantial
more ideological social forms like
racial hierarchies last when they
operate in some kind of self reinforcing
system with these other more durable
forms that is when built forms and ideas
like racial hierarchy work together and
self sustaining systems I'm gonna turn
first to the example of redlining the US
government practice of defining certain
neighborhoods is too risky for banks to
invest in them so this is going to be my
example of how built forums and
ideological forums work together to
sustain each other over time
in 1934 the Federal Housing
Administration guaranteed loans only in
neighborhoods occupied quote by the race
for which they are intended and where
local schools should not be attended in
large numbers by in harmonious racial
groups so very clearly ideological law
with very clear racial racializing
principles in it this law then prompted
the building of mostly white suburbs
redlining then shaped other forms like
the construction of mass transit systems
that linked downtown's to white suburbs
but bypass minority neighborhoods so
racism which begins this process then
organizes other social forms racial
hierarchy if we take it to be a form
first separates neighborhoods by race
then it directs the connective routes
taken by roads mass transit and clean
water which then entrenches and deepens
poverty and inequality in the redlined
neighborhoods
which then feeds a cultural myth of
white superiority why can't they pull
themselves up by their bootstraps why
are they still in those poor
neighborhoods what so these work
together to feed in a kind of formal
feedback loop to feed back into the
ideology that begins them so at first
redlining was a federal program but then
private banks took a cue from government
policy and also denied loans to
prospective homeowners in black and
Latino neighborhoods and the results for
african-americans and Latinos in the
states have been pretty similar across
the country from Seattle to Columbus to
Philadelphia even long after redline B
redlining became officially illegal
minority neighborhoods are still cut off
from good transportation a high quality
education and labor opportunities and
this keeps racialized poverty going so
the hypothesis here is that clusters of
interacting forms sustain a racist order
across u.s. cities carrying with them
predictable content consequences in
almost every context where they go now
you might say that the persistence of
racial injustice is exactly why we need
to fight forms and systems but I want to
take the argument in the opposite
direction and make the case that the
portability and the durability of this
formal model has a valuable lesson to
offer to those working for social
justice if we understand how forms work
together to reinforce one another over
time we might be able to develop our own
better more just models to take the
place of the unjust ones that are in
place now constellations are systems of
forums that could reliably predictably
and sustainably produce and reproduce
equality so to that end let me offer a
more hopeful case than redlining it's
the city of Belo Horizonte in Brazil
called the city that ended hunger
a leftist government in the 1990s
developed policies to guarantee food as
a right for the city of more than two
and a half million people it had very
high rates of child malnutrition and
mortality at the time Belo Horizonte
introduced not just one program here and
one program there but 20 integrated
solutions which they called a food
security system elements of the system
include nutritious school meals
subsidies for fruits and vegetables
designated sites where small local
farmers are given access to produce
stands to sell directly to urban
consumers training programs for bakers
and chefs seed distribution to school
and community gardens and licenses for
food trucks to move around the city as
long as they spend a certain amount of
time in poor neighborhoods selling fresh
foods at a fixed low price probably the
best known of all the programs has been
the so called popular restaurants these
restaurants serve high quality locally
farmed nutritious meals at very low
prices and they are set up in a kind of
public atmosphere sometimes with live
music a lot of people who eat there come
from the middle and upper classes so the
point of making high quality meals and
having this nice Pleasant atmosphere and
centrally located these restaurants is
that it deliberately doesn't stigmatize
the poor it brings in lots of different
people so side by side at long tables
you see students the elderly
professionals and the homeless all
eating together when bill or Zhaan first
started its food system lots of people
said it's never gonna last this is just
dependent on this particular
administration as soon as there's a
different political or her a different
political will it's gonna collapse and
disappear but now it's been going for
more than two decades and scholars have
started to pay attention to why it's
staying in place what is it that makes
it endure as with redlining
the system is sustainable in part
because it's different formal elements
work really well together they reinforce
one another and a
kind of formal feedback loop so consider
the straight from the fields program
according to this program small family
farms near the city get government
support for growing fruits and
vegetables and they have to grow them in
certain environmentally sustainable ways
that's mandated by the program and then
they sell directly to urban consumers a
designated public sites whatever they've
produced so there's a public process for
determining which farmers are eligible
but which farmers are eligible is based
entirely on the income of the family and
the size of the farm so it's small poor
family farms that get access to this
program the government then sets the
sales prices so a bunch of important
forms are at work what I call forums our
work here including standardized
regulated sizes and prices direct sales
locations so certain sites in the city
and a transparent so public selection
process another form the network also
plays a really important role here
belleros on deliberately locates these
sales sites the places where you can buy
the fruits and vegetables in really busy
urban spots where otherwise fresh food
is really scarce so it's like two
different networks overlaid on top of
each other human hubs where there's lots
of human activity food deserts where
there's very little fresh food that you
can get um I I noticed when I was
thinking about Chicago that the food
deserts in Chicago are actually map on
to the red lined neighborhoods in
Chicago and I don't know because I don't
know Columbus well enough I'm not sure
that the same is true here but but those
of you who know the city might be able
to say whether this is somebody's just
tried to map the food deserts in
Columbus whether they map on to the
redline neighborhoods is also really
interesting right because then you could
see the history of these forms
continuing in other kinds of ways but
anyway Belo Horizonte Liberty located
the farm stands
at these at these at this crossing of
human hubs and food deserts and what's
been really important is that the
various forms of the street from the
field program reinforced one another so
city dwellers get access to high-quality
fruits and vegetables at low prices
rural farmers have the chance to make a
decent living and that's really
important because if they don't if they
fall under the poverty line they'll
migrate to the rural - sorry to the
urban shanty towns which then becomes a
cost on the city so if they stay on
their farms and keep producing food the
city doesn't have to support them so
that frees up more resources to put back
into community gardens or school food
programs so the city has used some of
the money that's saved by keeping people
on their farms to Train gardeners and
chefs and so on so great news is overall
health income and environmental
sustainability and nutrition have all
risen and Baelor or is on since the
1990s and it seems to be still going
strong
so the interlocking forms of the food
security system work together to sustain
each other over time now I've been
calling a food security system that's
the term that the city itself uses but I
just want to point out that security is
a term that we left us usually hate it's
a term that's not even in our vocabulary
we associate it with terrible repressed
repressive police and defense forces
what I'm suggesting in this talk but
that's kind of the core of the problem
that we have for social justice we've
thought so often of terms like security
stability predictability as the enemies
of social justice that now when we want
to if we want to think about something
that can sustain itself over time we
need to reimburse these terms and we
need to think about how to make them
happen
so it's a new way for me to think not
only about necessary elements of
political experience but also desirable
elements this political experience that
we may want the predictability and the
stability of food security systems where
we may not want national security or
security forces in the same ways so
instead of stressing the excitement's of
radical freedom on the Left we would be
exploring a new and paradoxical kind of
radicalism that values the building of
stable and stabilizing forms for the
long term now of course it's not hard to
imagine how architects and urban
planners could be crucial to this work
of building sustainable forms for
justice and stability I in fact have
been asked several times when I've given
these examples in English departments
and other literary context whether I'm
really asking everybody in the room to
become an urban planner and the answer
is of course no because that would make
to many urban planners and you guys need
jobs those of you who are training in
that field but it's very clear that I am
wandering away from my own home
discipline of literary studies and
probably to some of you it seems
arrogant or familiar or even downright
foolish of me to think that I have
anything to say about urban planning to
the group of students and experts who
are gathered here in this room but this
is the thing that the kinds of questions
I've been asking can only prompt me to
range across social and aesthetic forms
because they crop up across different
pieces of life they're not confined to
one discipline or another so I want to
spend the last section of this talk
reflecting on why I think this kind of
interdisciplinarity and particularly an
interdisciplinary thinking about form is
worth doing despite the very real
dangers of ignorance and superficiality
that attend any attempt to cross back
and forth between different fields like
literature and architecture
so that brings me to the third section
of my talk which is why should formerly
minded thinkers like many of you and
like me work across disciplines
why is interdisciplinarity of value now
a lot of people would say well part of
what interdisciplinarity does is to
bring our expertise that we've developed
deeply in a given field to a collective
venture right so we want to think about
politics architects and urban planners
will bring one set of knowledge --is and
literary critics will bring another I
have a different way to think about it
and that's what I want to introduce to
you here which is thinking formally
across these disciplines and from that
reflecting back on the limits of what
each of our disciplines does so the
first reason that I'd like to think
about ranging across fields is that some
very simple basic forms like say the
binary where the hierarchy are
organizing social worlds across many
different sites and practices from law
to religion to art to Empire if we step
back from the ways that each field
approaches its materials we could engage
in a kind of meta disciplinary thinking
about these shared forms across these
different fields and practices so one of
my own more unpopular claims in my own
field context has been that forms are
portable and generalizable they move
across media and across contexts so for
example rhythms can organize a piece of
music or a heartbeat
or a group of workers rows can organize
a bee hive or a theatre or a classroom
and I learned from design theorists that
as forums move they carry with them
certain generalizable capacities but in
design theory and I believe architects
have their own term for this but design
cognitive design people call affordances
so
a given design or a given material will
afford certain kinds of activities or
practices and it will foreclose others
so for example a dining table afford
small-scale conversation eating paying
bills maybe writing a dissertation some
of you may be doing that it doesn't
afford mass spectacles or marches you
can't do that with a dining table
hierarchies afford gradations of
importance and they can be reshuffled
but they don't really afford resolution
like drama or flow like liquids
affordances like forms are capable of
traveling across contexts
so as each form moves from place to
place it'll take its affordances with it
always able to do some things well and
others badly or not at all so part of
what I'm saying is that I think forms do
move across the kinds of things we
separate into different disciplines in
the university they can show up across
multiple disciplines and I also think
that we can use some of the same
formalist methods to analyze both
aesthetic and socio-political forms so
on the one hand the novel affords plots
of marriage and maturity and on the
other hand the public square Ford's
visible mass gatherings including
protests so we can use the same formulas
to a cab you Larry our framework to
think about these very different kinds
of forms
so thinking formally allows us to cross
different domains of experience to
understand how each form does a certain
kind of work in each surprisingly
different context so you know here's
just one example that feels resonant
right now and that's the form of the
border we can obviously analyze the work
done by the same form of the border in
architecture and in political science
but in fact the form itself is is a
common it's a
a structural problem that both fields
are thinking perhaps differently so can
they inform each other about the work of
the same form now what each form can't
do has come to seem increasingly
important to me especially when it comes
to interdisciplinarity so I've started
to be concerned that we tend to take the
constraints of our forms of knowledge
too much for granted in each discipline
so it can be hard when you're working
within a discipline to see the limits of
the forms that you're using and the
possibilities that other forms might
afford you that you haven't been
considering so for example if you're
used to working with big datasets you're
gonna be thrilled to spot big general
trends but you might well not spend time
thinking about the limits of the forms
that you've used to organize and
communicate your knowledge so for
example let's look at this bar graph
from the Congressional Budget Office
which shows the average gains and losses
in u.s. incomes between 1979 and 2007
now what's great about this graph I
think is the incredible contrast it
registers right the huge gap between the
incomes that have lagged for the bottom
four-fifths of the population and then
skyrocketed for the top 1% of the
population the graph uses color both to
set off the top 1% as a separable
category so it's actually part of the
top fifth the top 1% but also to
foreground the startling difference
between the 1% of the rest and their the
color red probably signals like
emergencies or or stop signs or
something that that that that that
carries meaning beyond simply the
difference in color
so what graphs like these are best at is
tracking patterns across large numbers
so they condense vast quantities of
specific examples people Jobs dollars in
one stark immediately at
handed comparison what it doesn't do for
example is give you any sense of why
inequality has grown what forces have
led to this growing gap it doesn't
invite us to think about what obstacles
prevent a given household from moving
between wealth brackets or what outliers
might do that make a difference that
kind of knowledge it seems to me is much
better handled in narrative form the
telling of stories that unfold over time
I began my own academic life as Todd
mentioned as a scholar the British novel
and I love and have always loved the
fact that the Victorian novel focuses on
problems of social inequality and
poverty and I continue to admire the
ways that the novel affords particularly
a sustained attention to what it feels
like to be poor what kind of the daily
constant hardships of poverty are like
and so we often say that the novel
builds empathy I want to say it actually
produces a different kind of knowledge
that is a knowledge of what those
obstacles and hardships are is not
contained for example in this bar graph
but over the years I started to see the
novel as having kind of limited
affordances for thinking about poverty
in certain ways because of its forms it
does certain ways of thinking well and
other ways of thinking badly so I
started want to pay attention to the
limits of the novel and to think about
both what political questions it does
really well and how other forums we
might need also to help us think about
certain aspects of the polis so one
really wonderful critic in my field
named Alex Wallach has pointed out that
the nineteenth-century novel
democratizes its characters that's he's
not the only one to point that out
instead of just focusing on
princes and and kings and gods and
goddesses in the 19th century pretty
much anyone can become a major figure in
the novel you can have a major character
who's a prostitute or a thief or an
orphan or comes from nowhere but on the
other hand Wallach argues the characters
that the novel gives us attention to are
almost always very few in number it can
only focus on one or two protagonists
everybody else falls away into the
background so some novels experiment
with a few more major characters but
typical form of the novel is tough a few
major characters everybody else becomes
minor so what like argues that this
formal point about character has
political implications because our
attention to the few comes at the
expense of our attention to the many the
collective as he says any character can
be a protagonist but only one character
is so what forms might be better for
helping us to think collective
experience if the novel isn't that good
at getting us a sense of collective
community experience the problem of
living together the many what would be
better at capturing that experience I
want to spend a little time here with
another book from the Victorian period
which is not a novel and which I don't
expect most of you to know although
there I know there are a couple of
people in the audience that do know it's
a book that helped me to think about the
limited affordances of forms and the
importance of thinking across fields for
thinking forms it's an 1851 book
although it was a result of a bunch of
serialized articles called London labor
and the London poor by a kind of oddball
guy named Henry Mayhew he was somebody
who dabbled in lots and lots of
different forms in his own life he was a
journalist he wrote novels he performed
chemistry experiments he wrote several
plays he founded the satirical magazine
punch
he wrote children's books and cheap
pamphlets and educational treatises this
is his most famous book
and what interests me in this book is
that he kept experimenting with forums
through the book in how to represent the
poor and especially the poor as a large
body of people how do you capture the
huge experience of the London poor so
one form he returns to again and again
as the statistical chart so he estimates
how many pounds of fish were sold in a
year on the street how much ham sandwich
sellers sell on average how much a bunch
of flowers costs on Sundays so he keeps
coming back with tables we might call
that the Mayhew of big data but like a
lot of humanists working right now
Mayhew suggests that numbers alone don't
actually give you all the information
that you need he wants us to understand
what it feels like to be poor and most
memorably he includes first-person
accounts in the words of workers on the
streets themselves and this is now
thought to be Mayhew's most radical and
most influential idea he says his is the
first attempt to publish a history of a
people from the lips of the people
themselves giving a literal description
of their labor their earnings their
trials and their sufferings in their own
unvarnished language so these voices are
something like the opposite of big data
they focus our attention at length on a
single person's experience Mayhew asks
workers to describe their labor
conditions and their home lives one of
his most famous subjects is an 8 year
old girl who sells watercress on the
streets to survive she says I bears the
cold you must so i puts my hand under my
shawl though it hurts them to take hold
of the crisis especially when we takes
them to the pump to wash them no I never
see any children crying it's no use
so these vivid first-person accounts
afford not the large scale but the
specific perspectives of struggling
individual people May he says explicitly
that he wants to counter the dominant
middle-class assumption that the poor
are responsible for their own hardships
continues to be a common assumption
today and this kind of textured account
of the obstacles and hardships that a
year-old worker faces is much more
effective for that purpose than the
lists of numbers that he's also
including and of course he implies that
he needs both of them he includes both
of them both the sympathetic perspective
of the suffering individual and a
recognition that this suffering is
happening on a large scale which we see
in the chart now what's really
interesting to me about Mayhew is that
even these two very different forms
don't quite satisfy him and he starts
experimenting for a while he presents
his interviews with London poor people
as dialogues between himself and
individual Londoners and in fact the
watercress girl is one of those that he
interviews but then he starts to include
long monologues entirely in the voice of
the worker and he takes out the
interviewers questions completely so
here's one example
an old blind street seller says my
husband was a Custer monger and we
didn't do well oh dear no sir because he
was addicted to drinking now this is the
kind of example there are lots of them
in the text where clearly the
interviewer has asked a question but we
don't see what the question is and the
interviewers question has been erased
so the form a human Dobbs is not a back
and forth dialogue but a monologue where
a first-person speaker addresses an
audience who is there but doesn't speak
one of the reasons this form matters is
that it's gonna stick around for a
really long time Mayhew is now credited
with inventing a technique that's a
staple of sociology and the other social
sciences
that's the ethnographic interview he's
the first to interview poor and socially
marginalized people at length about
their own experiences beliefs and values
and to communicate this in their own
words as a valid knowledge of the world
so why this new form on the one hand
it's a monologue one person speaking on
the other hand it's not really solitary
we're kind of aware that there's an
interviewer there even though the
interviewer isn't saying anything so
it's a form that combines individuals in
a social context individuals on a kind
of collective quiet collective that is
in their lives so it allows me you to
join his pretty radical project of
allowing poor individuals to speak with
his project of never forgetting the
social context for any individual
experience now a lot of people say that
Mayhew is novelistic you can read him
and you get some of the experience of
reading novels and in fact he influenced
all kinds of novelists including Dickens
but he's pretty deliberate about
abandoning two of the most important
forms of the novel and those are
protagonists and plots
unlike the novel which focuses on a
couple of major characters and everybody
else's minor he just gives us one after
another after another after another the
list is potentially endless of his
characters each one is as important as
the next one so it's a bunch of equally
important people who follow one another
in the series no one is the center then
when it comes to plot the series of
voices he gives us its plotless it's
potentially endless there's no shape or
arc to it it doesn't conclude in any
kind of conflict so his series of
monologues in theory couldn't expand to
include absolutely everyone and in fact
the book ended up being five volumes but
he was still wanting to work on it after
those five volumes so it was in the
sense couldn't come to an end in that
way either
but the reason I think that Mayhew turns
away from plots and protagonists that
neither one is quite democratic enough
for him plots focused too much on a
particular outcome or particular end and
he wants to give us a big-picture
protagonist focus us too much on the
single person he wants to give us so
many individuals that we don't have a
sense of just focusing in so the last
forum that I want to talk about with
Mayhew is even the ethnographic
interview for him he didn't didn't
always satisfy him so he starts to
introduce yet another form where he
collects a whole crowd of people in a
room and he asks them questions about
their experience and let me read you
just a little selection from one of the
a lot about 20 was here about to
volunteer a statement concerning the
lodging houses that is kind of poor
places where people sleep by which he
declared he had been brought to his ruin
but he was instantly assailed with cries
of come down hold your tongue and those
became so general and we're in so
menacing a tone that he said he was
afraid to make any disclosures because
he believed if he did so he would have
perhaps two or three dozen of the other
chaps on to him great confusion mr.
Mayhew will it hurt any of you here if
he says anything against the lodging
houses yes yes how will it do so a voice
if they shut up the lodging houses where
are we to go if a poor boy gets to the
workhouse he catches a fever and is
starved into the bargain mr. Mayhew are
you not all tired of the lives you now
lead vociferous cries of yes yes we wish
to better ourselves from all parts of
the room and do not the parties who keep
these places grow rich on your
degradation and your peril loud cries of
yes yes so in this passage the crowd is
obviously not an ideal collectivity
there the majority are deliberately
intimidating the poor guy who's trying
to volunteer information to the
interviewer at the in the very first
part of it but may he still points us to
the specific affordances of the crowd as
a source of knowledge he's always been
interested in getting individual voices
to speak but he also knows that there
are limits to that because they may be
too partial or not representative enough
of the group that they pretend to
represent so the joining of many voices
in the single space allows him to give
insight into the dynamics of the group
itself including the intimidating
expression of mass feeling like desire
and fear and the desire to silence
outliers and whistleblowers but he also
gives us the perspective of conflict of
different perspectives on this same
experience and with large groups
answering the questions
and of course as you probably noticed
the text here starts to read an awful
lot like a play Mei who seems to be
borrowing the form of the dramatic
script and this makes sense formally
he's trying to reveal the limitations of
both particular persons and the angry
crowd
neither is adequate so he thinks we need
both in a kind of tense and unresolved
dialogue where everybody gets a chance
to speak but nobody comes to any
conclusion
so no form is better suited to dialogue
probably than drama
so with Mayhew we move toward an
understanding of collective life through
a deliberate heaping of very different
forms statistical tables ethnographic
interviews and dramatic scenes in our
university today our disciplines
typically divide these forums from one
another we put statistics in one
department drama in another department
ethnographic interviews and yet a third
department but what if we need all of
these forms to capture the experience of
the collective or the problem of poverty
for example statistics won't allow us to
understand the struggles of the
eight-year-old girls selling watercress
on the bitterly cold London streets but
on the other hand we won't know how
systemic or widespread that poverty is
unless we start gathering large numbers
so I want to suggest that may he's
gathering of many forums for
understanding collective life might be
valuable for us today because our
disciplines don't always recognize the
limitations of their preferred forms we
might argue for qualitative /
quantitative analysis or for
practitioners / theorists or for the
sciences / the humanities but in fact
all of these forms have both
capabilities and limitations they have
affordances each form of knowledge
allows us to think certain thoughts
while hiding or obscuring others that
means that our disciplines are in sense
in a
producing certain forms that replicate
their own limitations over and over
again and yet we may not from within the
discipline be able to see those so I'd
like to make a case for a slightly
unusual version of interdisciplinarity
it does draw and what other people have
said about working interdisciplinarily
which is that we need the work of many
disciplines to address urgent global
problems like climate change and
inequality but I'm also proposing that
we turn to a specific kind of meta
disciplinary thinking that is a
formalist analysis that allows us to see
the contours of each disciplines forms
of knowledge including what each form
prevents us from knowing or thinking as
well as what it's good at this might
push us like Mayhew to combine or borrow
forms from other disciplines or to
develop new forms out of the ones that
we're already using so finally this
brings me back my last minute or two to
literature and architecture in my own
field we've often celebrated art as best
when it breaks rules and frees us from
oppressive systems but I think artists
know as much or more about rules and
constraints as they do about freedom
poets and novelists think in and through
constraining forms as do painters and
composers and of course architects and
filmmakers and even academic writers all
of us struggle to craft understanding
meaning and meaning with and by way of
forms and since living together requires
constraints of all kinds including the
fact that we have to share space an
organized time we have to distribute
labor and resources a focus on
constraints is essential to politics so
we in the arts and design fields I think
are perfectly poised to think about
constraints in a way that's not only
about limiting our freedom but about
enabling life in common we're among the
people best able to imagine and build
systems of interlocking forums to
sustain collective life over the long
term and no task it seems to me is more
urgent right now than
thank you
[Applause]
