okay well welcome everyone thanks for
coming to the first lecture of the
spring 2019 semester we're really lucky
to start this series with Eric Fowler
Eric is joining us from Boston where
he's an associate professor in
architecture at the Harvard Graduate
School of Design and along with me Jean
Yoon a principal in the Boston based
practice how are you in architecture
Carl Ian has an enormous collection of
projects internationally an extensive
list of honours and awards including
progressive architecture award
architecture records design vanguard
award and the architecture league's
emerging voices award now I'm super
thrilled personally that I could join us
but I think it's also a particularly
tricky thing to introduce Eric and his
work and that's one of the things that I
think makes his practice so important by
that I mean that you may notice tonight
that the projects that we'll see in the
following lecture are carrying on
conversations with a host of what we
might call architectures tendencies or
what Jeff might actually call
architectures tendencies and more often
than not the work is not only
participating in these conversations but
offering really canonical works within
each of these contemporary disciplinary
conversations and yet at the same time
the work always manages to resist being
totalized by any one of these individual
tendencies so for example prior to
founding Hilarion Eric was an associate
principal at kpf leading several very
large building projects like 118 story
international commerce center in Hong
Kong
in 2000 he wrote 1001 skyscrapers with
median Union in 2003 if he were a
skyscraper or vertical now and at the
GSD he teaches courses on steel
construction technologies with focus on
tall buildings so certainly much of
Eric's work with how are you and could
be understood as advancing contemporary
conversations on tall building typology
but how I use prolific work on the
skyscraper is a type is paralleled by a
body of work that's so small that it
challenges the scalar conventions of
what we what constitutes architecture at
all these very small things include
bespoke circuit boards kinetic urban
furniture and computational swings but
while this parallel body of work
consists of things almost too small to
call architecture
he's responsible in my opinion for
evolving architectures conversations on
digital technology through the
introduction of hardware and physical
sensing into discourses that have
historically been preoccupied with
software and screens this innovative
work is paralleled by another body of
work collection of projects that
demonstrates the office commitment to
material innovation and experimental
understanding of craft these projects
include everything from do-it-yourself
injected molded pop-up libraries to CNC
carved compression-only structures so I
think you see where I'm going with this
that is that every time you think you've
found a thread through which you can
organize the offices prolific output you
find something else that not only
frustrates your understanding of the
work but is leading an entirely new
conversation somewhere else altogether
this resistance to being totalized by a
singular discourse is one one of the
imperatives of what Eric and region have
called expanded practice which is also
the title of the offices 2009 monograph
now in a really straightforward sense I
think this is an enormous leap clever
way for them to organize their work
basically it guarantees that you're
always invited to the party but you can
always leave when you get bored that's
to say that there's always something
about their resistance to these
totalizing discourses that allows
Halloween to continually recalibrate
their engagement with contemporary
moment but beyond that it also suggests
that lurking beneath these diverse
individual strands of research
Halloran's most experimental project is
perhaps the kind of meta project of the
office itself a continually expanding
expanded practice that serves as a lens
to which we can all glimpse a
contemporary architectural moment in
which architecture itself seems to be a
comprised of increasingly diverse
collection of non totalizing
conversations and to me this notion of
color um the organization as a
continually experimental design project
seems like the right thing to keep in
the back of your mind as you're seeing
the work tonight because it's not only
this meta project that underwrites the
enormous diversity of ideas that we'll
see tonight but it also suggests a more
generous and perhaps even more
experimental way to be an architect
today and in that sense Halloween is an
ongoing project that all of us who are
trying to be architects today should be
super grateful for so with that let's
welcome Eric
thanks Curtis it's true we are sort of
confused about about the particular
tendencies or discourses that were
participating in we're just trying to
sort of figure things out so I called
this lecture signal-to-noise which is a
term we're testing out signal-to-noise
is a ratio between what kind of signal
or broadcast is sent out and at the
moment where it becomes sort of
perceived or understood or decoded by a
receiver and so borrowing that term from
communication theory we thought we might
think about architecture as a broadcast
medium as a kind of form of mass media
and think about the question of
signaling noise as a way to think about
the contemporary moment maybe in our
sort of world of cultural production
we're sort of trying to send out signals
in a cloud of noise and a background of
noise and maybe we can use that to think
about what it means to practice today
has to have an idea for a book or a
title for a book by doing a lecture so
we've been using this title as a lecture
sort of test drive and it's a book that
we're currently working on for the
studio but signal-to-noise as a concept
how do we use that how do we think about
architecture as broadcast or as signal
and you can't help but think about
specifically about architecture and its
audiences those audiences how are they
receiving the work how is the other
noise sort of surrounding the reception
of your work and how might we think
about sort of contemporary moment in a
kind of state of distraction you know
what does technology have to offer the
ladies looks like Rijksmuseum in
Amsterdam something so compelling on
their screens that they put me in look
at the Nightwatch Rembrandt's behind
them and so this seems to be
increasingly are kind of our new normal
and how does architecture either engage
with these technologies how does it use
these technologies to disseminate itself
or how might it become part of this if
you think about architecture as
broadcast or as mass media you might
think about the Gothic cathedral is a
kind of form of mass media's and a
state-of-the-art sort of architecture of
persuasion where if you enter a
cathedral if the columns are are
attenuated to the point where they're
almost dissolved the quality of light is
coming through its producing special
effects and that might sort of conspire
with the music and the smells and the
sounds and it might sort of inspire you
to sort of believe in something and so
architecture if we think about it in
those terms might be in a contemporary
way also a form of mass media a form of
persuasion or a form of communication
that aspires to reach a sort of greater
audience now Walter bender me who sort
of wrote about the metropolis in the
early 20th century describes that kind
of phantasmagoria sort of walking
through the city and he identified view
sort of protagonists within this modern
city the Flener The Dandy the
shop-window no shopper and he described
architecture is always being received in
a state of distraction and so I'd like
to think about Walter Benjamin's sort of
you know Paris in the 1930s I mean I
think about Times Square and I imagine
how does that flare sort of fit into
Time Square and what would
Lenard think about Times Square if he
was distracted and bombarded by
commercial communication in the 1930s
MIT received the sort of the
contemporary moment today but if we look
at the history of architecture and
here's a skyscraper skyscraper as a sort
of form broadcast the PSFS building with
its logo at the top using a kind of
architecture to brand a corporation
that's a form of mass media and then we
get the more kind of explicit sort of
architecture of display of presentation
kind of billboard architecture so this
idea that architecture is sort of
struggling to communicate something that
it's sort of trying to find its
audiences whether it's sort of
communicating through iconography or
whether it's communicating through light
it is always trying to message something
and increasingly those messages are sort
of being sort of mixed so when Prince
died all these buildings turned purple
and everyone said isn't that nice
everyone changed their buildings purple
footprints it turns out it was the
Queen's birthday and so purple wasn't
Prince it was actually the Queen and so
as architecture becomes sort of
augmented by the capacity for it to
start to communicate through a kind of
very low definition signal of color and
maybe sound some of the signals are
getting lost in this sort of super
abundance of imagery and so this is
actually the building I worked on under
an 18-story ICC tower and Hong Kong
which is now 180 story display screen so
this was something that was anticipated
by some sort of visionary filmmakers
like like this slide from Blade Runner
but increasingly I think architecture is
becoming more and more a kind of
interface so it's not just a billboard
exactly a kind of interface it's a
screen through which we interact with
the world it separates us from them
inside from outside and increasingly we
have expectations of architecture
it should respond to us that it should
acknowledge us that it should do more
for us so how do we think about
architecture and the city with this kind
of new enhanced or augmented capacity
for every user and every individual to
connect to communicate to broadcast to
post to link but there's still something
about the public realm that is
unpredictable that is maybe accidental
and that's something that it's hard to
reproduce through all the networked
devices that you might have the capacity
for people to to be alone in the city to
be together in the city to sort of form
collectives to form publics to sort of
gather to communicate back to government
maybe only available in the public
ground in space as well as as in the
media these I would say governed by a
set of codes and some of those codes are
sort of explicit like the kind of do's
and don'ts of something like this but
there's also kind of implicit codes of
like when is personal space too too
close and when is someone standing a
little bit too close and something like
personal space is something that you
don't really study in school maybe but
it is something that we think is in a
way the kind of starting point for our
architectural practice when media was
starting to teach at MIT her first
project was the defense progress which
basically defined a kind of personal
space realm around her body
with the idea that technology could
produce a dress that would be
architectural it's not fashion it's not
clothing it's architecture because it's
really about the sort of definition and
calibration of a spatial cultural social
environment and intimate architecture
around the body
and so this was our first project 2001 I
mean because it was at MIT we're
starting to be interested in how these
technologies could help us think about
architecture differently in 2004 we
completed this project for that Athens
Olympics which was a competition to
transform an urban Plaza at the base of
the Acropolis into a field of light and
sound and we sort of launched into this
unfamiliar territory with
microcontrollers and LED lights we said
what if the field responded to the user
and simply acknowledge that the user was
so this is a video of 2004 before every
iPhone before an iPhone so this was
captured on a video cam I think in the
end she had put this but people moving
through a field of fiber optics from
from back to front from left to right
and this idea that you would sort of
moved through the field and it would
emit white noise and it would emit white
light and the sound of the white noise
would sort of mask the sound of the city
and we thought maybe we could make space
or place simply with sound and light
this was a kind of ambition 2004 what we
learned is that people sort of went into
this field and were somehow stimulated
by it enjoyed the kind of responsiveness
to the electronic responsiveness and
then they refused to leave and so they
they just sort of went in there and got
stuff so our idea about building a kind
of behavior through electronics was sort
of frustrated by human behavior which
was actually you know more curious less
likely to behave how we sort of imagined
them so this was a kind of early project
in in electronics into space making
placemaking
through kind of most minimal material
but what we argue whether the media of
this interactive space was in a way the
the medium of architecture of urban
space making recently we were asked to
do a project on the us-mexico border and
so we continues to do these kind of
interactive communicative projects our
client is the General Services
Administration which is the federal
government and they were building a
border crossing on the Mexico
US border in San Ysidro and so we said
well what's happening there people are
waiting to come in sometimes they wait
for six hours to come across the border
and what are they doing they're sort of
looking through their windshields at the
word and we said maybe what we could do
is we could take away the signals the
signals of the car passing through the
border and sort of broadcast that and so
this concept goes basically have a
display every time a car goes through a
creative kind of flash of light and
it'll dissipate and basically mark the
passage of people across the border on
this display simple idea it's really a
screen it's a screen that's one pixel
high and about 600 feet long and so with
the federal government as our client you
install that strip of light across the
top there and if you go to the San
Ysidro border you can see that's for the
light every time the car goes through a
flash of light and so when you're
sitting in your car waiting across the
border you're like is anyone moving yes
they are I can see they're moving wow
what does it do maybe it acknowledges
the flow across the border going to be
the acknowledges that that the border is
pervious that it's porous and maybe in
this time of like xenophobia and racism
maybe this idea of the world wall as a
kind of impenetrable membrane to protect
the u.s. maybe this idea of porosity and
acknowledging flow normalizing flow
might be some sort of antidote to this
kind of hysteria that we see today okay
so we have been working in this mode of
like electrons and signals behavior and
politics another sort of chapter in the
book is looking at
local means and methods like the more
traditional how do we make our protects
your how does architecture communicate
through its kind of materials so a few
years ago we were invited to do a
project in China we were sent this
drawing it was planned it's really a
parallelogram plan they said how would
you like to design psyche and say gee
how's a corporate retreat and they said
there's only two conditions it must be a
Chinese courtyard house and it must have
a sloped roof I said fine so we studied
the Chinese for your house and we
acknowledge that you know that in the
Chinese garden there's a figure of the
pavilion and there's a field of
architecture the architecture becomes a
kind of frame and so that sort of figure
field relationship is inverted in these
particular garden types we sort of
naively interpreted the courtyard
section as is and we proposed this and
when we presented it quite pleased we
thought we'd to achieve the brief we did
a courtyard house and these are our
collaborators that's our scheme there we
presented this and the client basically
nearly fired us all he said these are
not Chinese Court houses I don't
recognize
all you guys go back and start again so
in China when you when you present to
the client they tell you if you pass or
you didn't pass it's kind of like school
it's pass/fail like so we all fail and
the client told us to go back to the
drawing boards he sent us to look at
Chinese gardens and said look at this I
want you to get that Chinese feeling and
we said what's that how do we study that
haven't researched that how do we draw
that and so we tried really hard to sort
of understand what it is about this
particular scene what's the relationship
of the architecture to the open space to
the landscape to the vegetation to the
views of the sky and so on he also sent
us to the MA mountains to climb this
mountain and the guy said before dawn
they marched us up to the top of this
hill and they said okay over there
that's Chinese feeling that you can't
drive that's what it is can you make
your architecture out of that so we went
back to our drawing boards and we worked
on it and we worked on it and we really
tried this time to make something a
little bit more responsive to the
context in which we are working I think
initially we were sort of working at it
at a kind of an arm's length from from
the context we did develop drawings
submitted the drawings for the building
and the details and then waited we
waited for about six months and didn't
hear anything from them and then six
months later we got an email saying hey
the good news is the projects starting
again we've changed the site and we've
changed the program now it's the rest
but we thought we would mirror your plan
because the site looks different so we
mirrored your plan and and by the way
it's written in instruction so so this
is China you know you're trying to catch
up with the client who's sort of working
at a different pace so we quickly looked
at our drawings and under construction
this was our old site plan remember site
G this is the new site so they basically
Meredith and and we sort of shoved it
back in there so we sort of adjusted it
got up to fit again and so the new plan
is this one and then we started to work
the program changed again in an
exhibition home still works and then we
started sending rhino models back and
forth we're sending them drawings as
before you know can we get that transfer
here you know maybe and then in fact
they started building it based on those
you know very crude drawings and a bunch
of emails back and forth in China they
build it almost the way you've drawn it
so it's not less it's more it's more or
less it's like more or less what you've
got so it looked a little bit like
they asked us what what would you like
it to be Claddagh and we said what about
that Chinese brick the grave brick and
the windows we propose to make them out
of wood and they said how about for 10 -
fine so it was really collaborative
we had a lot of ideas and it turned out
pretty nice ten looks really really rich
and warm against the cold brick
environment but the stuff of is so
common everywhere and we said what can
we do with the great brick and so we
said what if we use the brick as a way
to sort of acknowledge where you are and
so we had this idea we put a compass on
the brick and the brick is always
Cardinal and so this concept of so
here's the plan and then there's there's
orthogonal and there's obliques and
every time we turn the corner like
that's an orthogonal that's an oblique
so the bricks were always Cardinal what
that means is that as you walk around
the building you're going from smooth to
jagged to smooth and jagged and it's
really sort of starting to sort of tell
you something about what the geometry
the building is doing and so as you walk
around the building it's sort of
locating you in in the site and around
the building and so this is a east/west
wall and the texture of the architecture
is sort of signaling that it's also sort
of telling these two or not are not
orthogonal and it's producing a kind of
background against which these sort of
bright figures are sort of embedded but
it's also creating a kind of texture
that signals something else and to the
client that communicated Chinese that's
something that we could not have sort of
understood sort of before we started and
so for us this was an incredible
learning experience we went in with our
kind of abstraction in our kind of
Western mode of thinking and abstracting
and sort of making contemporary and then
by getting sent back to the drawing
board and forced to sort of recover we
came up with something that I think was
actually you know quite different it's
not something we could have imagined
from the start but I think it does speak
to a kind of practice that is at once
global and local and trying to work to
fit in I think if we went just globally
to sort of propose something that would
you know work here in the States or
might work you know elsewhere by
thinking about what's available in China
in terms of labor how can we communicate
this simple rule to a bricklayer and
achieve a kind of I think quite dramatic
effect by making sure that the rules are
simple
the rules are communicable and at the
end of the day the effect is perceptible
and I think people who walk by the
building say oh yeah that looks like it
fits in that looks like it's somehow got
that Chinese feeling so that was a kind
of big lesson for us another project in
a different mode now talking about
Curtis is different modes if that was
maybe globalization and sort of context
this is starting to shift towards
something else a few years ago in Boston
there was a bombing at the marathon and
several people were killed in the
aftermath with terrorists sort of killed
an MIT police officer Sean Collier and
on campus and so Sean Collier was sort
of instantly sort of memorialized
through these sort of spontaneous
displays and MIT who had never
experienced this before so how do we
acknowledge
we can write this and so they asked me
to think about making a memorial and
they said how can we make a memorial
that is contemporary how do we make a
memorial that's mighty and so we thought
about what's a memorial
what's a memorial today and there were
lots of ideas and you know at a school
they had a hundred and eighty sort of
proposals for what to do for this
memorial and some people wanted a flag
and some people wanted forest but as we
thought about what is a memorial today
we realize that you know it could be as
ephemeral as that kind of as a flash on
an LED screen I saw this the other day
mascot highway sign you know but as we
thought about what's appropriate we were
thinking about MIT and their slogan is
men said - which is hand in mind which
is somehow appropriate for MIT
they added Fortis which is strength and
their t-shirts that said MIT strong
Boston strong Collier strong which is a
kind of response to terrorism we need to
be strong and so when we started
thinking about it we said well what is
strength
for architecture and how do we think
about strength and structure and maybe
equilibrium as it as a concept that's
where Sean Collier was killed right
there next to this Frank Gehry building
that's where his cruiser was parked and
so we thought about this hand this sort
of MIT hand open hand and his desire for
a flag or a star or forest or a boulder
how do we reconcile all those things and
so we came up with this idea we make a
figure that kind of marks the spot and I
figure we'll take a boulder that they
want to take away the boulder and
we get the void or the trace or the
conspicuous absence of that Boulder
and so the memorial was really a kind of
an abstract figure that became this sort
of hollowing that does resemble a hand
or a star it does have a missing bullet
and so in a way it sort of responds to
all these desires for the same thing
like the family wanted a forest and a
water feature and the police officers
wanted to starve our flag and so we
produce something that's sort of
flickering sort of between different
readings for some business it's a hand
for some of the star for some it's an
arch it's a vault it's a and for some
it's a it's an operation it's a boolean
it's a it's a subtraction it's the
intersection of two geometries and it
also acts as a kind of viewing device
you can sort of use it to sort of sight
from the center the location of where
this Boozer was parked but basically
this is sort of figure this abstract
figure tries to negotiate all these
different desires that are sort of big
not bad we also thought it would be
great if we could make it out of solid
stone and that's something that we
presented to MIT leadership and he said
we'd like it to be solid because the
contractor said how about veneer and he
said it what's veneer so we said what if
we make it an arch and we use an archaic
building technology like an arch and we
actually build it out of solid blocks
and so we embarked on this
who's a structural engineer at MIT whose
specialization is in a way Inka and lots
of you know boss and Inca stone we tried
to figure out how to make an arch today
it's a it's a building technology that's
so obsolete nobody remembers how to do
it we know it conceptually there's false
worth of scaffolding you sort of work
the way to the middle you drop it at
Keystone but this design frustrated all
the structural engineers software
because all the structure engineers were
trying to use tension and compression
and we said there's only a compression
there's no tension it's only compression
and what would it take to do just stone
stone is falling as it falls at gems
thrusts onto other stones that thrust
onto other stones that thrust on the
other stones so we did this with the
help of four different structural
engineers we basically realize that it's
super it's super sensitive to lateral
displacement right and so if those
buttresses start to move
it'll displace by a factor of six so one
millimeter this way is six millimeters
that way collapse could happen pretty
quickly as those buttresses start to
slide and so we realized that it
required a precision you know the
tolerance of this would not allow for
any sort of slippage and so it had to
fit together perfectly
arches tend to do that
to fit perfectly we did work it out with
with our model with a high degree of
precision we modeled it we were so proud
about you know geometries we calculated
it and then we sort of procured it so we
went to Virginia we found a blouse
verified that within this massive piece
of stone we could extract out the figure
this perfect figure that had to be
fabricated with no error we couldn't be
more than a millimeter off because if it
was off by a millimeter then it wouldn't
fit then it didn't fit we have
concentrated loads which could produce
cracking which could produce collapse so
it was this kind of extra need to be
precise we levels of precision I'm gonna
huge confidence in our digital
fabrication you know we have the tools
we have the technology why not demand
this kind of precision so we worked with
a fabricator in Wisconsin but porous
stone and they milled and they know the
name in some of these blacks were known
for weeks at a time 24 hours a day
continues to play in the carving and
what we learned is that
you can put the file in the contractors
hands the contractor develops a tool
path the tool is petting the phone you
think you know with the damned or the
size but as the stock cuts the stone the
stone where's the salt where's so the
diameter of the saw is getting smaller
every time it cuts the stuff so you
think oh it's a computer I can tell it
exactly how how how it will be in the
world but the fact is it's diminishing
in size - so do you know really where
the interface between the stone and the
solids you don't really know because
every time the two processes stone the
tool changes and so that's a kind of
reminder you know that is pushing back
even as your digital tools are carving
it there's a kind of resistance that the
material produces and that resistance we
think about is error in architecture we
demand a kind of precision and a
tolerance because we have digital tools
but this resistance that the film is
providing was such a kind of an
eye-opening recognition of the kind of
kind of stubbornness of material even as
we think we can carve this
digital or digital tools so at the end
of the day we learned a lot about stone
fabrication by finishing and polishing
but also about qa/qc you know how you do
quality control on a block of stone
where they're no sharp rocks we've just
handed them a digital file and they're
telling you before I put on the truck
trust me it's exactly the way you
specified it so we actually had to
develop a different methodology for
verifying the precision of the block
before I got in the truck and we shipped
to Boston from Wisconsin so all kinds of
interesting adventures in digital
fabrication at the end of the day fabric
you know the blocks that were delivered
on time they arrived on site and they
were laid over this gravy which is set
on many piles
halfway through me despair there's a
duck Bank going through the site which
is all the power and data to MIT so not
something you want to mess with so
luckily we were spanning over that duck
bang we managed to install all the
pieces they arrived on site there are
beautiful pieces of granite
we picked the granite has that kind of
figure so that you can follow the figure
around the stone it wasn't a piece of
veneer that would change and it wrapped
the corner you would see the grain
moving around those holes there this is
the debate between John ochsendorf and
nippers Helbig so John ochsendorf said I
don't need pins the pins will be gone in
300 years
the stone will be there for a thousand
nippers Helbig said I'm the engineer
record I want to pin
and so guess who won we got pins so
they're stainless steel pins that just
align the stones they're not doing any
work they're not seeing any load unless
the stone slips then they'll retain the
alignment and it's sure that the loads
are transferred so you think you have an
engineer you think there's a single
solution
there's a million solutions every
engineer will have a different approach
to how to do this particular problem we
installed this in the snowiest winter in
recorded history more than a hundred
inches of snow went out that had to be
done by April 15th which was the
anniversary of the attack all the
scaffolding is there I should say you
started with the course we started the
Keystone right you always imagined
Keystone goes in last right in this case
you started the Keystone we built a
memorial around it because we figured
this piece has five sides and three
faces so there's 15 cases that have to
be perfect and you're more likely to get
that done first and then share the
tolerance towards that perimeter then
you are to get all these pieces in and
intra drop a piece in last minute so
you've learned something about starting
in the middle and working our way out
and then the buttresses came in and
supported it because it's MIT they said
this is research and so they they put
all these scales underneath and they
were measuring the load the vertical
load that was carrying each of the
blocks and so you know think about
forces that you can't see it right I
can't see force in a material but you
can you can measure it and so all these
scales were measuring the weight of the
blocks as they were sitting on the
scaffolding and as they lower the
scaffold they could watch the load
transfer from the center to the premiere
and so they saw arching take place
through the scales so John was very
excited all these guys were super
excited to hollow out the scaffolding
and after months and months and months
of working in this sort of scaffold for
the first time and it took eight hours
to lower all the scaffolding and
everybody was sort of sitting there
waiting and then nothing happened yeah
it just stayed there it stayed up in the
air and everybody said it was the most
exciting day of their lives we thought
it was pretty exciting too so the
memorial was completed it was
inaugurated if you go there today you'll
see this sort of hollow and it actually
has weird effects when you walk under it
there the acoustics change you get these
sort of focal points there's a polished
surface on the inside and a kind of
flame surface on the outside it does
produce a lot of sense of a kind of
sense of enclosure semi enclosure we're
trying to screen a little bit of the
Frank Gehry building in the background
it's hard to think about being
contemplated when there's this sort of
agitated architecture around it but it
does do that it does sort of produce a
kind of semi enclosure it does produce I
think a sense of kind of awe or one
merit about how this arch which has
about 70 foot span to be so horizontal
and we did introduce these legs that are
constellation of the stars on the night
that he was killed so there's layers and
layers of meaning that are built into a
more perceived but they might perceive
it or they might not they might find new
meanings in it
but it was inaugurated this is the
inauguration
it has become a part of the fabric of
the campus and then about two months ago
they got an email message saying hey
something's happened a drunk driver lost
control ran into the memorial oh my god
did it collapse do you know did it you
know apparently it did not it Stood
Still
they clean it up but I'm glad the pins
are in there just because belts and
braces
you know we don't need them but it's
good to know that they're in there so
more lessons learned I think from
working in a mode it's unfamiliar like
we're not structural engineers we're not
stone aficionados but we sort of
undertook this project on the hunch that
a contemporary arch would be an
appropriate response for MIT to take in
the face of a kind of terrorist attack
it would provide a new type of memorial
that isn't representational explicitly
but communicates so much content on so
many different levels through different
kinds of abstraction and MIT is pleased
because it's something that it's you
knew it's also research it's also
didactic you can sort of look at it and
start to read it
you can read the kind of question of
thrust and the sort of the inclination
of the joints actually perpendicular to
the spine and so there is a kind of
didactic quality to the memorial and the
family and the community seems quite
pleased with it we we continue to do
projects in the public realm partially
because as a young practice those are
the kind of projects you can get private
projects public projects we did this
project in Phoenix a few years ago it
was an art project and he said well
maybe we could make
a shelter we can make place by making
shade and shade I'll just shave it
actually shadow and so how do we sort of
make something that casts shadows and in
Phoenix Public parasol might be a way to
create place make people gather in the
shade and so we developed this sort of
origami type of canopy we also observe
that because Mexico City that people
will stand and the shadow of the flag
and you know over the course the day
that moves around and the people is just
sort of scoot around with it so we
thought that's that's good
in Phoenix maybe people will move with
the shadow of this canopy and so we
proposed this kind of bees in Roosevelt
Street and we developed a universe
Helbig
to develop something that was very very
thin steel plate it's a quarter of an
inch from certain uses other views is
complete pink and so it blocks the Sun
it lets the air move through it it also
creates patterns of shadow on the ground
and so when you observe people sitting
on any that they'll sit under the shadow
and they won't sit in the Sun and so
another kind of lesson and placemaking
in material research and in human
behavior how do people use it in the
daytime at nighttime it's actually
better use at nighttime imagine it also
has TVs which were sort of oriented
towards the Sun and sort of illuminate
the structure at night time and you know
Curtis alluded to this probably
propylene swings we keep getting asked
to do these public art projects and the
problem is once you do one then they ask
you to do more
I really want to stop this stuff but
they keep asking for it so we did this
proposal about four years ago for these
swings at the Massachusetts Convention
Center this park it's a temporary park
and we need to make it really active and
we said well how about a kind of playful
space and so we made the swings that
have an accelerometer in them so when
they tip they turn the feet and when
they're still they they're white and so
the swings sort of respond to the kind
of degree of inclination so it's a
simple simple
as if people need incentives to swing
which changes color to incentivize you
to make it pink but the first year it
opened it was a message popular not just
for kids without the grown-ups and we
found that architecture for a crowd like
this and provoked different kinds of
behaviors even amongst grown-ups and
serious people who wouldn't necessarily
want to be seen swinging will sort of
let down their hair so another kind of
lesson in building and behavior is how
people behave in these types of
environments the first year we made it
at a pyro with a CNC mill we did this in
our studio we have a kind of maker
tendency so here they are the
cross-section is a triangle like this it
was our super rigid people don't expect
it to be rigid because it's lit
something that's lit shouldn't be rigid
but it is and then we developed
rotational molding put this thing in it
goes in the oven and that's Eric Koston
mold and so we got these beautiful
pieces that come out there's the kind of
until around there but we installed one
and then we saw the field of them we
also did TVs but the crazy thing is you
know if you build it they come and
people they get a swing these days
because they're so crowded and so this
public space is so successful firstly
because there's a beer garden exit but
super successful people love this way
[Music]
[Music]
and we wanted to have more more dunes
than don't but I've been collecting like
the need because post them on Instagram
so I'm always very watching to see how
to use them there come to Boston you
know swing on our swing so and then so
we made these icons like do this do this
that's okay you can push and you know
but don't do that like you know what are
the limits of like what you can do and
what you can't do
so no smoking please no rough play
don't drink too much you know drink will
enjoy responsibly
you know don't leave luggage unattended
don't steal them please and then they
got carried away take selfies please you
know post on social media fun
there was a show Cooper Union called
drawing codes and they were asking us to
think about codes right and people were
sort of computation of doing drawing
through that these are kind of codes
right codified behavior urban farming is
good this is bad anyways we got Kari
okay so that was kind of fun in our in
our book because this is a format for
book write in our book we have different
chapters one of the chapters we called
ecologic what is it about the present
moment that we're all of a sudden aware
of our environment and and we became
aware of our environment maybe when we
looked at New York magazine Simon has
black for half of it right this is
superstorm sandy which wiped out the
power grid for lower Manhattan at that
point people realize that our cities
which are we thought were you know to
the most gentle of super storms right
and in Houston that the environment is
changing that the human sort of actions
are affecting that environment and what
are we to do can we do better planning
can we do better zoning can we do more
pervious sidewalks pervious plazas can
we have land use that doesn't celebrate
the automobile there are so many
questions on what is designed to do so
we think well what do we need to do we
need to convince people to behave
differently you know it's not about PBS
it's actually about behavior and how do
we convince people that their behavior
matters and how do we convince people
that that energy is visible so we've
made some sort of modest attempts to
sort of make energy legible and a few
years ago we we sort of continued the
tradition of like you know
do-it-yourself and make
we thought we could make a better wind
turbine you know and we thought maybe
people don't like wind turbines because
they think they're machines I think
they're ugly what if they were beautiful
like this piece of sculpture so we
thought we could invent the better wind
turbine and we tried different design I
thought that one is quite attractive but
it didn't spin quite so well and I
thought it doesn't need to be optimal it
just needs to be barely functional but
we installed this at MIT there's a
building called the green building
skyscraper and the wind hits it
[Music]
the doors because there was too much
negative pressure on the doors so this
was a huge embarrassment to MIT and so
we said why don't we take the green
building at MIT
and could we make the wind visible we
make energy legible so we produce kind
of Ecoliteracy
among people these energy sources are
abundant they're around us and maybe we
can convince them to sort of recognize
their kind of environmental presence on
this on this planet so this is a kind of
series of like how can we make a
contribution to environmental thinking
not by saving or using less but maybe by
making more we also a few years ago
we've proposed this project in
Philadelphia Philadelphia mural arts was
our client their environmental learning
classroom in the Schuylkill River and so
if you know Philadelphia it's a city
between two rivers and those rivers have
historically led to the kind of growth
of Philadelphia but if you follow that
River this is the Schuylkill River Vella
where and so for hundreds of years
coal has come down as Google has been
processed and shipped out of
Philadelphia so yeah we know the kind of
historic city but we don't really know
this kind of energy metropolis and so
the school was so polluted fire
at some point it was so polluted with
with them chemicals with fuel that was
spilling into the river so it's Google
turns out it was one of the first
Superfund sites the federal governments
that we're gonna clean this up and it
turns out that there's a tremendous
desire to sort of re connect to the
waterfront Philadelphia is or it turns
back on the waterfront how can we make
that connection again and so the
proposal is to float this classroom out
onto this Google and you see the energy
infrastructure right there can we bring
people right up to the water right into
the water and sort of reframe their
relationship to the water so they're not
looking down at it they were sort of
looking at it and they're sort of
perceiving the river in a different way
could we produce a kind of moment where
they would perceive the question of
urban nature differently we reframe
their attitude about the river through a
kind of displacement of the sort of
point of view so this was a let's make
the submarine that we could float out
into the river you fill it with water so
we sink it into the river
submarines flood their ballast chambers
to sort of submerge and then they pump
out the water to to to surface in
Philadelphia we dropped it in the river
it's the yellow of course and so we
launched a prototype to prove that we
could submerge a chamber into the river
we brought our donors to the site they
experienced the float lab
and they gave us three million dollars
to build the submarine so look out for a
foot left not this summer but next
summer because we're gonna flow that
into the river to allow people to
experience that urban nature from a
different vantage the last chapter in
the book you know books are tricky
because they take a long time to make
and you put it in there by the time it
comes out it's all old work and so
what's the point of making a book some
content that's sort of as timely as
possible but also content that you
couldn't find online and so feeds are so
powerful but we wanted to have some kind
of work in progress so this is a bit of
a snapshot of the studio how does it how
do we make stuff there could be some
sort of current work in the book and so
I want to show you two more projects
that are super current and we'll see how
they make it in the book because I'm not
so sure but we keep doing work in China
this is Chung dude this is villas it
looks a bit like this so our client
controls this piece of real estate this
big and they're building like crazy so
they're purchasing said site and we said
well Michael Moulton is doing a and
Brooks carp is doing E so I called him
up and I said are they paying you and
they said yes sir
so we decided to go for it and we're
working on this project this hotel hotel
it's Larry's hotel and we said well
what's a boutique hotel with 18 rooms
maybe we can think about it as a kind of
kind of sculpture as a kind of figure so
we pitched this idea of this kind of
subtracted solid which will be the hotel
rooms are actually in this zone here and
we're developing this with the client
for 18 rooms and you know how do you
achieve those big sort of sculpted voids
you have a big mega trust I support
these models because in China when you
when you come with a model like that you
can always tell the engineer like that
member right there get rid of that one
and it's a lot better when you have a
physical model because if you don't
speak Chinese it's hard to point to a
digital model so you bring a physical
model with you you can coordinate much
better so this is a hotel
we're in design development working out
the inevitable need for windows in hotel
which is sort of working against their
desire to create kind of solid into
which we can carve away these voids but
we are excited to develop those as this
sort of kind of boolean and extrusion
sort of create that aperture in there so
we want to hold the surface keep it
solid but still allow for views through
it
and so this is a kind of ongoing project
in China with these kind of crazy
schedules hopefully they won't change
our program or the site mirror our plans
okay so this is sort of ongoing it's
sort of in the in the works just get
through it quickly
and then okay so the last project I want
to show tonight is this project for UVA
UVA is you know the Academical village
designed by Thomas Jefferson it sort of
set the kind of template for
all-american sort of campus design I
would say and it produces ideal view the
ideal view the pavilions along the
Rotunda it's perfect but the only thing
that's not perfect is how is this
enabled and if you look here you know
you see that you know there's a slave
taking care of a white baby and so what
we know is that University of Virginia
was built by slaves professors owned
slaves students owned slaves and so
Jefferson's sort of idealism sort of
runs aground on this question of how did
actually work it actually relied on the
kind of violence and institutionalized
slavery so UVA recognizes this and they
launched a campaign to build a memorial
to acknowledge that in fact when we were
preparing for our interview with UVA I
remember vividly Michelle Obama at the
National Convention said I wake up every
morning in Addison's with my slaves
I think that was a moment where a lot of
people said holy that's true the
history of this country and all these
monuments and institutions were built on
the back of enslaved peoples that was
high opening at the same time these
Confederate monuments are being
contested
this is rubbery Lee square in
Charlottesville Virginia so you've got
slave history
you've got founding father who owned
slaves all these contradictions you have
people for whom this statue represents
but for others this represents
intimidation violence racism and so as
we prepared to interview for this
project we thought how can we engage in
this dialogue how can we add something
to it
how can architecture help how does it
participate in this so we put together
great tea remember the interview we got
the project then we went through the
six-month engagement process meeting
with the churches meeting with the
students meeting with the staff we
propose many different schemes all
around the university we finally settled
on one site which is here it's a circle
[Music]
so as they're returned those are kind of
cupola this is the kind of bowl that
kind of negative figure what we
understood is that making a place for
people to gather and a clearing in the
woods a kind of kind of opening between
the campus and the city might be
something that could be used there would
be inscriptions and carvings on the
outside and names carved on the inside
so this is the the proposal
it's kind of an earthwork partially
because it's a UNESCO World Heritage
Site so you can't really build anything
but an earthwork you couldn't build a
new structure there because you wouldn't
be allowed to so
someone pointed out that Jefferson's
real contribution wasn't so much
architectural as landscape as site
planning you know the brilliance of UVA
visits its terracing and the way it sort
of pavilions face the lawn but on the
underside they sort of face these sort
of sunken gardens where all the slaves
were working and slaughtering animals
and
and nobody saw it because all that stuff
was hidden by the section and the
section was produced by the landscape so
maybe this idea of a site work is
actually not a bad idea
turns out there were up to 5,000 slaves
working on campus at different times
very few of them were actually named or
recorded because they were property and
so the records are very sparse but we
wanted to acknowledge them somehow by
inscribing something onto this memorial
and so we've been working with an artist
who's sort of looking at the kind of
textures and the carvings and looking at
how we could inscribe on the outside
because there's a tremendous desire for
something visual something recognizable
abstraction we understood isn't gonna
cut it and so we're developing a
technique I'll put a big bar where we
can use a mill to sort of cut grooves
and at different depths to produce a
graphic image that is sort of
in taking a raster image like the eyes
from Isabella Givens who's one of the
first slaves to actually come out of
slavery and she became a teacher and so
let's photograph of his ability even is
being sort of carved and etched into
this through this technique and it's
because there's points of view more than
you see the image and then the points of
view don't so we're sort of working in
this sort of delicate balance between
signal and noise but there's so much
sort of texture noise and a certain
moment it sort of comes into focus and
used to perceive the image and then then
it's gone so that's something hard to do
it's hard to do in stone but this is a
mock-up that we're doing in Wisconsin
and if you stand back far enough you
could almost see an eyeball in there we
see it there's the people anyways it's
something that's gonna be quite big it's
gonna be on a curve and so you're gonna
walk around it and sort of discover this
image and then sort of keep walking it's
it's a pretty tricky for the fabrication
thing like the slope of the wall is sort
of inscribing that kind of you know the
geometry of your body when you're
standing you can just sort of touch the
and touch the wall so it has that and
the question of names is super difficult
because they were considered property
they weren't always good in names and so
how do you acknowledge the humanity of
an enslaved person when it's hard to say
what their name
and so we've got historians at UVA so
they're looking through the records
assembling the names and then we're
trying to memorialize 5,000 names but we
don't have 5,000 names so we're making
5,000 marks and as names are discovered
apparently there's new names bother here
those could be inscribed we call my
underscores and then the mains would be
added above the underscore on this sort
of pattern and there's a sense that
later when you experience 5,000 of
anything you know a kind of quantity has
a certain quality and to be sort of
enveloped in 5,000 marks you can have a
sense a kind of visceral sense of like
wow this is a lot of people that we're
working here anonymously within this
super super violent institutionalized
system so this is ongoing
[Music]
Oh
Oh
[Music]
what you saw there was a timeline that's
being carved into the memorial and you
think a timeline is something fairly
straightforward there's a group of
historians at UVA that assemble the
timeline they've been arguing about the
actual wording for months they're saying
can we say the word rape or should we
say a sexual assault and he's saying
sexual assault different from rape the
timeline records some real atrocities
you know 3 UVA students raped a 13 year
old slave that's gonna get carved into
the memorial and the UVA or visitors
said is that something that we want
carved in every morning should we have
that on our campus is that something
appropriate and so we said we have to
present these facts in a way objectively
this memorial is meant to acknowledge
these atrocities in a very direct way if
we start to sugarcoat it or edit it or
whitewash it
that's the slippery slope right we start
to say well I don't want to advertise
these acts of violence on our campus but
it's meant to acknowledge those acts of
violence so we're right in the middle of
a debate between the Board of Visitors
who's saying hey maybe we shouldn't have
these gruesome acts carved in stone
right on our campus and the historian
saying this is the front line of history
you know if we give now we will have
sort of participated in this sort of
great sort of whitewashing of these
these events so fascinating to see sort
of history sort of working itself out as
we start to carve blocks of stone that
have been placed on the campus a couple
more thoughts so as this project was an
ass was written up in the Washington
Post and then two weeks later the last
summer actually
these guys showed up right and why did
these neo-nazi KKK right-wing people
show up on your V A's campus they showed
up because the statute Robert Lee was
there and there was a desire to remove
that statue and so their argument was
we're here to defend this statue they're
here to defend their identity but why do
they pick you yeah all right it's Danny
and part of the Rotunda right why not
stand in front of the robbery Lee's
statue which is on the other side of
town but they came to UVA to sign in
front of Jefferson's iconic architecture
because maybe they felt that the
ambiguity of Jefferson's never by like
slaves I don't like slaves that
ambiguity I think opens the door to this
kind of well maybe we can leverage chefs
than maybe Jefferson to support maybe
Trump would support our cause so the
fact that these guys showed up on uvs
campus because there's a kind of
unresolved question with history I think
speaks to the need to address those
histories quite directly so this was a
kind of frightening moment I think you
know immediately afterwards there was a
kind of counter demonstration by
students and people in the community but
it does a thing call necessitated kind
of direct response the kind of response
that is official and firm and
unequivocal calling out the history of
the university somehow acknowledging it
in a permanent way and I do think
architecture can play that role you know
we talk about memorials and monuments
today they seem outmoded but there is a
role for that I think
there is a role for artistry to
communicate those values quite
emphatically and quite unequivocally and
so I do think if we are to build a
monument or a memorial to acknowledge
that violent history somehow that
ambiguity would be less ambiguous and
somehow those acids that show that last
summer wouldn't feel like they could
leverage Jefferson for their cause and I
think that says to me that these types
of architectures are urgently needed and
I guess that's a bit of the kind of
signal and noise that that these are
messages is our broadcasts that are
there political they're urgent they're
necessary and I think architecture
design does matter in this particular
moment in time thank you very much
[Applause]
beyond their control
happening
and our latest burgers and so we have a
Chinese
you know construction detest all that
concrete
all right here's our joining and
they're super pragmatic
kind of frame and then they sort of the
wall was near there's a cavity wall
there tiebacks here we drew it as
details because we've been told it as
long as we offer to come in and
coordinating them and they always
so this is one particular semi shut up
and the chunky
first they say impossible and then you
sort of drop this booklet for your
design so I think some of the time you
need to go there to be there about as
you can if you have an idea - for the
effort in it because there's sorbets
yeah but if you're out of there just
happened without you but I think are
interested in how these come together so
we tried sexified we also the part of
we can execute differently perhaps with
Oliver pending it requires a robot on a
basic forget it you know for that kind
of precision in this context he said
let's make them all the same and so and
so they have it's an instruction it's a
code and it's super simple and it takes
into account the lady with context in
which you're working so you can do the
robot in time dude you gotta rely on
humans human error
[Music]
nobody knows
and when we interview the private I said
any signs
and we said six months meeting with the
churches and
and the student and
there's a huge problem and they refer to
the University of the plantation
that importance is going to all of us
community needs and working with them
and we're likely to be different meaning
but this is a negotiation with all kinds
of questions of meaning
emerging the gravity part of the ground
fine
I guess any kind
and
but working explicitly the meeting
openness
[Music]
the punctuation of the time and
aesthetic
sometimes that we do projects
in your house
some of them challenge you there's
probably
really
there's a
but
making boolean and I can't describe some
of these services sweet
I don't influence of those interfaces
I am ready for anything
we used to talk about this is a day
and inform
serious operations that are somewhat
Carcassonne imagine certain things
certain things in description of days
but there are certain things and that is
that meet those
we're very aware of a number of boolean
operation
we were aware
for me all of us to use the same style
resource or drawn the certain operations
that's just part of the way we work
my point about the carbon and awareness
he promises precise realities
this is a really really curious
and
is a beautiful lecture
the rotating circle it's a swing
the classroom and its
in places is the detail of its
three-dimensionality and architecture
performance if each time it performs
slightly differently
it appears more and more and more
inflate the hood sacrifice and Lexington
it's not just a circle it's a circle
with a signature and that signature is
not particularly performative and by the
time you be into the memorial it
somebody says oh look it's a swing set a
little bits a classroom and now it's
this memorial I start to wonder for
myself when does it get is this does
someone say to you with their social
media something like that is this your
signature what what is the medical
justification was architectural status
of that form no claims with specificity
places performance a surfer would have
been fine Afghanistan I'm saying
would've been okay it's when I work but
I really didn't worry about somebody
whose River says he was just like oh my
God he's already used it as a swing
very good
really
very nasty
[Music]
it's no accident
but this
they were agnostic
yes that is fair house I thought I was
racing with our client I said I know I'm
sure
that requires
we're having to the static architecture
problem of a very much related in the
user description in architecture
immensities great war or sexual saw your
video shown is the workers and as in
water so that sometimes there it's you
can read it professor
movement of the water in Sendai Japan
and I was thinking an interesting
solution to the problem because it's not
a page where you're forced to read it
it's a place that you have an
opportunity to read these architects
realized a mama that it's coming into
men
the messages
the question of leadership
interesting
they said well become fashionable you
know what everyone shared references
that's fine but in the ground
the architecture of humans or reason had
a very good interface it's an
interesting one
maybe the word visitors we would get a
better entirely legible all the time
kind of optics of the water are changing
so what is that what you attended
[Music]
our students rated slaves horrible well
that's easy that's the record so
how do we confront that
history on display these are kind of
lawyer
[Applause]
