thank you your honor thanks for having
me and I stayed in a place that I don't
spend enough time here but I assume I'm
very regularly and it has been a place
between the architecture in the
Westerners that really important
I've been going last couple of days
through things with the Student Center
going through the lecture I realized how
many touch points there are there so I
thought I would would just lay out a
couple of basic principles here that
you'll see it when you know it is a play
on the Supreme Court justices definition
of pornography which is if you knowingly
saw it for me I really think that it's
important before one starts thinking
about style and forms and shapes to have
a set of principles of evaluations and
to have some criteria for evaluation so
to do that I would do two minutes the
first is to just acknowledge some of the
Disciplinary quality than architecture
then I'm personally interested in but I
think these are like universal truth
could be just personal practice
I think what's unique to architecture
which is very different than say
industrial design or sculpture or other
things where you might
looking at form and shape and style is
that in architecture not only are we
organizing vast Assemblies of pieces
into very large objects but we have 2000
years of history where we celebrate that
so unlike ants a sculpture where you
might want to have a giant plate of
steel which is monolithic and whose
joints are invisible in architecture we
would celebrate the joints and pieces of
steel that are assembled so it's
important for me I find there a lot of
our historians that miss this fact to
understand that architecture is a
discipline with the history and a set of
criteria and it's very distinct from say
sculpture or industrial design the
reason I say that is that I think today
primarily because of our medium we share
a lot of design techniques with other
industries and other art practices or
and then we did 10 years ago so I think
it's important to make these
distinctions because we build large
single things out of a lot of parts of
pieces we have a tradition tradition of
holism and of the relationship between a
part and a whole and so proportion and
symmetry and harmony even though they
were kind of illegal words or illegal
topics to investigate for a long time
I'm personally interested in a lot of
these classical ideas and rethinking
them an intricacy between the massing
the interior the exterior the
relationship of all these things are
also very important
so in architecture you have a facade
where it's our obligation to represent
the interior of the building on the
exterior which is not to just say you
have to see through the front door but
actually in whether it's ornamental
structure or materials it's very
important for an architect to represent
what's going on inside something on its
skin again we're probably the only field
that really thinks that way
one of the potential frustrations of our
field is if people experience
architecture as ambience and atmosphere
people don't really pay attention to it
the way they pay attention to something
they're going to sit on or put in their
mouth
hang on their wall and finally in
architecture we really have to pay a lot
of attention to signature that for an
architect the identity of the design has
to transfer across great scales and
great building types and context so
signature is a little bit of an issue
for us as well okay so the qualities of
intricacy of facade an assembly of
different components are unique to our
field what's interesting now is that
we're using a digital medium and I'm not
talking about tools here but actually a
medium of expression which is calculus
based so whole numbers don't really have
any greater value than infinitesimally
[Music]
fractional number
or numbers to the Senate decimal point
in terms of mathematics so we don't have
to dates anymore about whether the
proportion of one to seven but your
notice to your head is better than one
to nine of your head to your body or
these kinds of discussions that
preoccupied architects couple hundred
years ago the digital medium thinks in
terms of series of variations it tends
to think in language of curves even
straight lines or technically curves and
the design software that I'm working in
and most of the students here working in
we think in this continuous sequence
rather than discrete sequences so it's
non-modular you can get intricacies of
scale where a change in one part can
change thousands of other parts we same
time in a parametric way similarly you
can get all kinds of nested hierarchies
where you make a decision about a whole
group of the pieces of geometry and the
change of the group will change the
particle you can also change the part
and it can go back and change the group
so it's a very different world than
drawing a thread and designing on a grid
so the confluence of these new design
medium qualities with architectural
qualities are what I want to talk about
tonight so the particle relationship the
fact that these new technologies are a
medium of expression I'll talk a little
bit about what is sometimes called evil
teenis which is a kind of pop culture
kind of and I want to talk a little bit
about rethinking minimalism and what
that would be today and I want to talk
about generic and genetic permit
variations so that's a kind of big part
that just as an example of how much
things have changed the the term generic
was being thrown around a lot and it
tended to me 10 or 15 years ago that
every day I noticed in a text that
generic actually was a biological term
from the late 19th century about
symmetry breaking and generic was
something which was not specified and
and I my world was turned upside down
when I read this particular biologists
view of a symmetry this is an image from
William Bateson a book he wrote in 1890
and this is the principle of faison's
rule the principle is simply this when
you take information away from an
organism it defaults to symmetry so if
he went around and studied all of the
exceptional cases of growth and found
that the exceptions showed more symmetry
than the norm and this led him to the to
invent two terms one term generic growth
which is symmetrical growth the other
term generically and as a person
turn genetic so these are two examples
of where you lose information at the
thumb what happens is the hand falls to
either mirroring for vicars where the
thumb would be or it defaults to
mirroring another thumb with before the
regular thought would be so the
Bateson's concept of symmetry is
completely opposite of mine which was
that symmetry was the sign of disorder
so if you had uninformed growth you just
simply took an object in the mirror and
without any information the way things
grow is just by mirroring the minute
they take information they break the
symmetry and change in some different
way so me I was that symmetry with the
sign of axial organization and central
organization in fact for this biologists
120 years ago symmetry was simply a kind
of rope that addition that was the sign
of disorganization so all of these
things like harmony proportion rhythm
all of these old
renaissance principles that have been
abandoned suddenly get very in trouble
when you use procedural tools evening
kinds of geometries and mathematics also
near symmetry we talked about this with
the students yesterday I found is the
easiest way to get something which looks
or
beautiful and I looked and I found that
you know there are statistical studies
of people's faces and when you feel
comfortable or uncomfortable with the
first thing if a person's face is too
symmetrical people feel like they're a
little bit off so or a little
strange-looking their faces are too
asymmetrical they also feel like they're
off but everybody is comfortable with
the percentage of asymmetry if you
actually give literal symmetry if it
comes very disquiet and it's experiment
they do where they take people's faces
and mirror them identically and it's
true they were absolutely monstrous so
so this idea of symmetry isn't the kind
of simple act bilateral or axial system
or so so I'm going to show I'm going to
bounce around aware that between various
scales of things I'm hoping that the
aesthetic principles hold true across
the scale I said the best example local
way of starting with symmetry keeping it
in the system and dealing with this new
kind of design media is set of flatware
and we've done a few things with Alessi
and Alberto Leslie said to me when we
started this project you know the way
this should work is you know great you
should do a spoon come to us with a
spoon and based on the design of the
spoon then my team meeting fluoresces
team will do the fork in the knife and
those
I'll fly back and we'll talk about those
and then based on those we'll start to
do all the things like serving utensils
80 knives and all that stuff and I just
felt like and they're working with this
guy but it's my friend she doesn't
understand me at all
this would guess that I would do the
spoon and have him do all the fun
variations so I did this diagram to show
him and to get started where when you
can see on the upper left
I designed what biologists would call a
primitive which is yet to be specified
beginning which has all of the
information you need to develop
specifically in a lot of different
direction so think of like a fertilized
egg or a single sale or something it's
poised to differentiate but it's not yet
specified so in that thing I knew that
we needed something that could be like a
wave something that could be like times
something that could be like a whole all
the elements for the flatware had to be
in that primitive before we can start
designing so primitive you know we
looked at all these different elements
and how to build them into a generic
thing once we had this generic primitive
design then we started to play around
with it and try to target it towards
different utensils of different and this
is more just exploring how robust our
original element would be at the same
time I started reading and opposed all
kinds of trying to get my hands I was
watching from
they could about flatware eating
utensils is everywhere and find out all
these interesting things they may didn't
know things about this but salad forks
have three times can't afford to have
poor pastry forks ever slide and hold to
the all these necks so that's a pastry
more of a salad fork and a bit of pork
meat serving for and we you know these
renderings but with this digital design
tool which was made not for any industry
in particular but made to take advantage
of calculus in terms of geometry so
animators like this I think industrial
designers and architects haven't really
tapped into the design potential of
these calculus based tools but what
they're very good at is blending and
mixing variables together is it as a
design medium so we principally have a
lot of kind of robots and things in the
office like this is 3d printed meaning
there's a machine like a little oven
that prints plastics in the office early
printed plastic models we then went to a
special place in Franklin's field and we
printed these tools field models and
then silver-plated them to start to see
what the flat layer would look like and
when I went to lesson with this you know
they're like wow I haven't seen a cream
chip making for a long time so they were
able to identify what all these things
were and the whole design process is
about designing something that has
very robust ability to mutate change in
a controlled design layer and it's not
like inputting information into a black
box that makes decisions we were talking
about it was very cool pencil for me the
design and and then learning about all
these different elements and so at the
end we did the conventional 52 piece
flatware set that has our very knives
and dessert serving spoons ladles and
all that set in the set now what's
important for me is that there was no
original spoon here
there wasn't one piece that got deformed
into all the others which is the
classical way of thinking about design
variation here they were all designed
together and they're all the family so
every one of them is different but the
whole family belongs to a group set in
this kind of approach to design where
you're not designing the perfect thing
but you're designing tens or hundreds or
thousands or hundreds of thousands of
unique objects all at the same time all
equally perfect and functional and
beautiful this is totally possible with
software and you know also has been
possible to turn to manufacturing for a
long time
we just have been able to
so this idea of a family of objects is
persistent and it's it's drawn a little
bit into industrial design projects but
again I would argue only an architect
continued something like this yeah this
is like the mullions in a curtain wall
where every moment is different but they
all make one thing only from
architecture which you have the idea to
design all these things and a family
that all belong together but are always
different but then it's very much like
how we think about parts of the building
and home this was a project that started
my relationship with Alessi which are
these teapots and I won't go into this
but you know here we designed a little
bit over 30,000 unique coffee pots and
teapots and the way we did it is we
design eight compatible curves would you
see in this graph and lofted surfaces
between these curves and worked on that
relationship of curve to curve and
we were confident that we could produce
always the same volume of coffee pot and
always Berg anomaly functional pots and
always beautiful great wind design and
to do that you know did renderings you
know I told the students that due to
wrong we had a discussion we all agree
there all right and built say hundreds
you know less than a thousand probably
more than 200 models to test them and
once we've gone through those several
hundred models I could say with
confidence I sign every one of these
30,000 pots they're all equally
beautiful that same approach translates
into the building scale this is a
housing project in Valencia Spain where
all of the apartment units are subtly
different and the subtle difference adds
up to produce a whole which is dynamic
these are the very first studies of the
unit's we molding this by these negative
voids that cut between them and these
are some very early studies what happens
in this project is we rationalize this
variation in a very particular way so
here in the plans you can see a typical
floor level where six of these units
vary
there's some two-bedroom units
medical evidence these are the kind of
floor-by-floor variations and we
rationalize these plates now the floor
plates where there are these super
components is what you call them it's
very large-scale factory-built
elements this is not the color of the
building is a diagram to explain to the
Builder power that were rationalizing
the system so there are four kinds of
product all of which are each one of the
four is different but they're all
mass-producible and they can be rotated
along a central axis and when combined
they give you these different voids in
between the blocks these are the
components we have you can see in the
top to bottom and half components the
only variations in them and when you
assemble them all up you get an effect
like this in the drawing which in the
drawing was great we then did in
renderings where it started to go very a
Flintstone in a sense of these deep
punch openings through a solid worse and
tomorrow the chapters so I started to
think about how to take the quality of
the window is a punched opening off the
wall and thought about doing some kind
of a reflective skin where we could put
reflective film on
laughs and have a reflective skin my
wife Sylvia Laven has been working on 19
late sixties and seventies architecture
discotheques in Europe and Italy and I
was thinking well it could be like a
diffracting disco ball it's also perfect
in it it sits in a warm room just
building its bank so that would be great
contrast with those with nature to do
that but instead of just cladding it in
metal we interpreted the image has six
different colors panel because of the
scale of the building to take advantage
of the fact that it's made out of
different parts and pieces it seemed
more sensible to treat the parts
differently rather than to rely on a
material to do that so this is laser
pointers tired
so this image is a model which we built
out of six different kinds of metal and
glass so there's seven materials here if
you look okay you see the mouse okay so
the different materials are there it's
all aluminum we just anodized aluminum
differently so there's white anodized
aluminum
there's gold anodized aluminum there's
copper anodized aluminum there's a rough
finish we're coming to there's pollen
and there's black anodized aluminum and
in addition there's mirror finish glass
so there's six different finishes here
to generate the dazzle effect of a disco
ball rather than just covering it what's
a powerful so here in the end that you
can see the kind of color coding of all
the different metal passions and it's
done as if it's a rendering so the you
know the white is from the side is from
an arbitrary position of the Sun the
dark is in shade shadow and then other
variations pick up the form so also the
color of the material accentuates the
form but it's an approach to the
building which celebrates the fact that
it's made out of a lot of parts and
renders all those parts as if it was a
whole I wouldn't have thought of it I
didn't have rendering software by the
way if you weren't assigning texture
maps to software
I really doubt I would have had this
idea
okay so also in terms of Pearson
so this is a predator that I did with
baby of our cacio painter and Fabian was
starting to paint these
three-dimensional paintings that were
coming off the wall into the room and so
we got together and said let's make a
giant hollow occupiable plastic painting
it's about a hundred feet long and I
don't know why Carey said yeah but
sounds like a good idea that we did that
and it was where I bought a large
robotic CNC mill for my office to make
all these panels and it's made out of a
couple hundred unique panels that are
molded custo guys and the process was to
take a piece of a shape of geometry and
translate it to the movement of a tool
pack like a drill and usually you do
that so it's smooth but the thing we
started playing around with how we
translated the geometry into the tool
into the tool path and we came up with
all of these painterly ribbons and
effects and textures even to make kind
of brush strokes this is a detail of an
interior wall with the unit serve
in Los Angeles rented the same thing so
the process of translating a piece of
abstract geometry into the physical
movement of a tool gives you this new
texture and pattern and articulation
same thing of this detail of the pretty
good white showroom and Stockholm Sweden
when we use that also to integrate these
removable posts but with this
translation from abstract geometry to
machine language gave us the opportunity
for a new language this is the number
one architecture Institute so that kind
of pattern and textures been interesting
to me also nothing special about frogs
but it's just a good example of a
pattern which is intricate to a form so
you can see the pattern changes where
the pond changes and that kind of thing
is very different than what say Robert
venturi or John gazelle detailing a form
with a texture this is a texture it's
intricate to the shape and accentuates
it so that kind of approach the color
texture and pattern is also something
playing around it's too late for me to
talk to you about the difference between
calculus and partial differential
equations of design but I would say for
a home of the students they're using a
subdivision surfaces out there and what
you're starting to use is a partial
differential
we should approach the design where you
start with lines and points and
progressively smooth them until they
approach curves now for the last 10
years I've been designing with curves
and then translating those curves into
lines like the services of the of those
objects which are tool start as
infinitesimally complex services that
are defined in calculus and get
translated into line movements of the
tool they have point coordinates for
where you attach them this other
approach which is becoming more and more
dominant is to start with simpler lines
and smooth them where you need them to
camp so this is a pavilion that Tom's
friends and the TDI C and Abu Dhabi
information on an island called Saudi a
cultural line with an avocado and it's
an artificial island Tennessee it's got
this is new velasmooth this is not by
the beads Music Center this was on those
Maritime Museum
and then Frank Harry's doing it behind
museum back here on the point now
connecting these up is a canal with 19
million array to them and I'm doing one
of those pavilions it happens to be one
that's a bridge across two different
sites the only mandate that that all of
us had from tom is these pavilions would
be used for single artist shows of
living contemporary artists and they
have to be able to accommodate the
largest work of art being done by a
living temporary as well as a lot of
small pieces of art by all living
contemporary artists so obviously he
wanted a high degree of flexibility the
the approach to it that I took was very
much inspired by the switches and
transitions of rectangular volumes into
domes and walls in Islamic architecture
in general as well as specifically some
of these Iranian and bath houses which
do this in a very intricate way in terms
of apertures and openings so here you
can see a detailed model of the ceilings
were working on where we have linear
wall divisions between galleries which
exist as a kind of uniform
playing in the soffit so you can build
moveable walls up to that point and then
as a both they potentially get smoother
and smoother until they make a kind of
oculus the other thing that's really
driving this project is if it's a kind
of art bridge to the gallery bridge that
spans the canal and we're holding that
horizontal bridge into a vertical
chimney which is typically used in
abilities or passive cooling so you
superheat these chimneys so you get
really hot and that air moves vertically
through them and you can start to draw
cooler air from the ground through the
building and generate these inside the
building and air flow so here the way
the way that works when you see the site
and the first site is here it wraps
around after
here you can see that in this roof plan
have these divisions of walls
progressively get their corners cut off
using an algorithm called changing
algorithm so they get cut once so
they're smoother so there's twice as
many lines neighbors here they get cut
again and get cut again so these lines
progressively become more and more like
circles here you can see the divisions
looking up into the gallery spaces
here's just a diagram showing how this
last covered bridge gallery is here so
you can get a big fast continuous
gallery space across the mentality in
this scenario or you can build these
temporary walls up to that nine meter
house often and be able to close up into
23 different galleries
really big stuff and then they have the
last bridge gallery here and here you
can see the way those solar chimneys
were so there are long blast ramp last
cover Gramps
they brought a one on the water that are
open on one side so they'll pull some of
the evaporatively cooled water off this
walkway and then these are the chimneys
that will get super high like 150
hundred eighty degrees in the summertime
and these will suck all the cool air
from that from the water through the
building and about the top of the
building you can see also the transition
from these facets getting more and more
fastened until they hit these oculi in
the multiple our key line at the gallery
a little bit like those remaining bolts
and it's a pretty with a ramp up here
and a ramp up there and then escalator
down there and escalator down over there
so everybody pulls into two entries in
each end of the bridge and the landscape
is pretty schematic right now but takes
on some of the form is massing BMW
design center the the approach of
services that I've been talking about so
far it's been about articulation and
producing detail
I got forced into a marriage with with
penny Slimane of Christian Dior project
revision
and hence remain as kind of an apex cool
grave in toys out there and in this
collaboration I got interested in using
surfaces or not maximal effects of
articulations but also minimal attacks
this is the project for Visionnaire
magazine with a Slimane and you know any
got on the phone with me and we said you
know I love your stuff I really want you
to do something special here could you
just make sure that it's a cool grade
number three box with no articulation
and no hinges or clasp and then just
knock yourself out yeah I guess but so
anyway in the magazine the Visionnaire
magazine was already designed and
printed so the this case that we
designed for it I decided to use the
surface of the inside of the case to be
the engines to be the class to remove
all the stuff that anyone had removed
but then to do it with some kind of
surface equalities so you can see there
are these teeth that run along the sides
of the case the interlock and there are
also these larger indentations that
interlock and then there are the ridges
that the magazine rests on so you the
magazine floats on this surface
and the only way to get it open and
closed is to lift it perfectly
vertically
up and down otherwise you don't need
hinges you know being a class so I was
able to get rid of all of the mechanisms
of a case by modulating the surface of
the interior so it's swallowing up
details with surfaces has been a
preoccupation this is the lesson coffee
cup where el derecho said no matter what
you do you have to put a handle on this
because architects never put handles on
their cups and people always burn their
hands and you have to have a saucer so
you don't burn the table when you set it
down you don't make a stay on the table
so this cup works that it's all and its
handles everywhere so inside here
there's a cylindrical cup on the inside
and then on the outside it has this
shape which is great to grab and it has
the ridges on it which are kind of like
the memory of the handles and also like
the texture of those walls that comes
from the reshoots and milling machine
and we opposed all the surfaces so on
every side of the tub there's like a
male side
five development everyone's pulling
together or male male Fox but these
things are all together and interlocked
so but when you put them on your table
you can start to make these crazy
arrangements and little cities out of
coffee nuts and because the inside has
an air pocket with the outside with
steaming hot liquids it here and always
grab it with your hand but I didn't have
to use a handle and didn't have to have
a saucer so this is a case where a
surface approach takes care of extra
elements this is that coffee set I'm
talking about these are coffee pots in
titanium and inside here is a blast
which is floated between a bed so you
can grab it and it sits on a tray which
is reversible so with the coffee and tea
pot full of hot coffee and tea you stack
them on this tray and the tray rests on
these ridges when they're clean and
empty you flip the tray over and those
ridges interlock with the backside of
the coffee pots so the ladies open like
a flower and the coffee table when
you're displaying it and then you spin
it around and then stack them up when
you're using these are just images of
how its produced same thing with this
ravioli chair routine trip where it's
got a hardened surface and a soft
surface and the soft surface is knitted
with the three-dimensional knitting
machine so that's why it's got half a
number of not
here that it kind of say there and the
arms the back and the seat are all taken
care of with one bucket and the legs are
all taken care of with they're kind of
hard shell so it's a two-part there's
more than just a pieces to this change
but it's souls the four legs that
Harmons the back of the seat with two
surfaces a soft surface and hard surface
and it's a chair chair it's not on our
chair we got asked to do in our chair so
the our chair version is gold-plated and
think that these plays this is the
champions algorithm that blends together
bowls and plates together material that
I've gotten very interested in is
plastics the plastics of the predator
here at the Wexner with one kind of
plastics this is a show with vitro with
these plastic bubble cabinets with my
robot collection well unfortunately my
my family of one very small fraction and
these spiral wax luminous ceilings that
we did so the base of the metric chairs
is fiberglass that's been painted this
is thermoformed plastic this is also
fiberglass
molded and so and I don't know why these
appear except that's a killer whale or
my neighbor
very inspired by large seem like spend a
lot of time using plastic and ability so
what I'm going to ask the new this house
the Pacific Ocean
I really thought about how could I turn
this into a boat house look at this
thing how could I use plastics in in the
house I also wanted to focus on the
interior volumes that were plastic in
the way the walls were all now this
house is it's a block which I know is a
job but we've maximized every sixteenth
of an inch we could to get a
single-family onto this tiny little lot
that was my foot on the way so this
perimeter was the maximum perimeter we
could take by the city and so then work
really started today to develop these
interior surfaces and it's like a
townhouse on the side walls I mean
there's some stuff going on with them
but it's primarily focused on the inside
of the house like the Vitra chair which
sucks the legs and the scene into a
service there's really the wall surfaces
don't make the rules it's a little bit
like an eighth off close approach where
the wall sucks out and makes a pocket
and then disappears back and they said
nope
the breakfast nook this wall sucks the
fireplace into the wall and then pulls
around to make a powder room and then
develops into a floors hold up and make
kitchen islands and tables and the
ceiling folds now that becomes a giant
boat like light so all the surfaces are
floating around upstairs all the
bathroom vanity and sinks and cabinets
and power looks all also get sucked into
a single surface so and one of the stuff
isn't slicing the wall also have this
stainless steel regolith that swallows
up all the windows so the windows kind
of split out of this metal rail and
pinch to disappear again this Orenda
very kind of first renderings where you
can see this fiberglass luminous ceiling
that folds out of the ceiling the
fireplace that sucked into all the walls
that curve around to make the rooms and
because of the frontal nature of the
house and every time we're in this
orientation we always have a grid like
an eggshell with egg crate grid like
this every time when at orientation we
fold the walls and where we need to
leave slicer there's all these slices
around you'll see this is from a couple
of weeks ago you see the fireplace with
the slice in it you'll see this wall has
really than it the way the walls are
made is with a kind of egg crate framing
that's cut by a laser this way there's
30
years old so I could've been doing this
30 years ago I was 14 years old we make
funny shapes just for everybody that
thinks a construction industry is so far
behind and we're so far ahead of
designers it's absolutely the other way
around so we cut all the components also
we took a look and we found that we
wasted less wood by laser cutting our
framing than we would have if we bought
a bunch of sticks and kind of the length
so this kind of customization is also
very efficient I've no idea honestly
about this the fuse it's done to stay in
California so slicing blue with the
laser can't be that toxic but anyway I
know it's not wasteful we we actually
put this all together we got rid of the
job captain towards the wedding is
getting we're near it and over the
contracting company and the two clients
of myself went over at lunch and
unwrapped all these pieces which had
laser cut numbers on it pop the wall
together ourselves and that's just to
say that unskilled labor can do very
precise things when you get machines
involved and also a very skilled labor
like a guy that's been classmate for 40
years Dean came in and did the you know
the plaster finish on the whole interior
so it was nice about this is there
weren't a lot of laborers with hammers
whacking around on things there were
pieces that came in
together precisely then we're really
expert artisans that came in worked on
so that's kind of the finished surfaces
we spent a lot of time figuring out the
spacing while that egg cream so we did
get these cellu-lighting walls also for
anybody that does is wants to do this
don't ever let somebody with sandpaper
hit near your plaster aphasias because I
know I've seen a lot of examples where
you try to get the shape roughly and
then rely on people with sandpaper and
they come in sand Impuls all over your
surfaces this was all done with can't
really see that but we also couldn't
laser cut it visit pregnant with water
get cut custom travel team for this guy
so we could go in the last thing that
ever did the surface was this drywall so
different pieces of the walls with that
plaster the movement of ceiling with
white the windows are all to say stop is
too extreme but their 15-year guaranteed
elevators if you just put a box under
this thing you call it a cathedral
window and so we just spun the top of
the cathedral window around indication
that the windows are all fixed it
deserves where they turn the corner so
the lantern was made up in Sonoma County
by Bill Chrysler most of whose work is
in building industry now used to be a
pistol and he cut foam molds coated the
toeholds in aluminum foil and cast
fiberglass panels off employ the world's
assemble them up in Sonoma on a template
we had an identical copy of the template
that we I'm sealing and then they got
shipped down in Seoul in the kitchen
we use those we started using a lot of
Orion which is a solid for plastic and
DuPont work with us molding technique
you can see this is the pigeon island
turned upside down but it's gonna sit
right here and all of the handles and
everything are also custom molded in
Corian a similar solid surface material
for all
in shells is when the inside of that
closet described up against the inside
plaster surface same thing in the dining
room because then in the bathrooms like
I said we took the linen cabinet which
is here the vanity the mirrors with the
cabinet's behind the sinks and molded
the man into a service and also you see
this becomes a rendering and mosaic tile
and that slice that surface like we did
with the fireplace same thing with the
breakfast table with the kitchen island
you can see the those do table elements
in the factory pieces of the room all
molded together in this monolithic
material and then install the tile is
all a rendering if you can see it there
better is all take it for a rendering of
this moral service so the graphic
quality of the tile also here is the
physical quality of these poor animal
services
taken with the bed we're doing in bamboo
floors the light bracket light which is
real 3d printed right because it
okay so all this plastic secretory and
plastic the bamboo even though we like
to think it's kind of healthy bamboo
it's all plastic pretty much so the
luminous sealing is all fast experience
wise Macalester the person who wants a
plastic house morning buddy is my wife
related and I'm going to show you the
design for our house which have been
playing around what if it's not getting
anywhere on but certain things from that
have come to fruition and again they're
more classics so for the house there are
few inspirations one is this house by
Lina Bo Bardi which cantilever is over a
hill and in the center of this
cantilever Carver's have a courtyard and
it's a really amazing house because you
get this floating courtyard and when
you're in the house you get an amazing
view out from the hill we also get an
amazing view down and out through your
house down so this idea of punching
courtyards through a suspended house
it's kind of the first place we started
you can see the lot is a pie shape why
again a very limited limited zoning but
by lifting the whole house in the air we
also have to park three cars on this
lock with a eight and a half foot
dimension
one end of the site so this whole thing
under here is a parking lot which
because we don't have that many artists
who live it so and light gets brought
into that through these courtyards which
are punched through the volume of the
house
the second thing are these illidan
columns of rights johnson wax where the
columns mold and disappear into the
ceiling
you know never know this but a lot like
some of those or her think are so that
things
and finally the structural idea is that
instead of having a trust built out of
columns with the many the trust is a
continuous roll to the team that runs
down the entire length of the house and
it's expressed on the side of the house
and also on the roof so they won't be
means that are bent the hard way like
this they'll actually be to like
introduce the very thickness and we
modeled these all with Gehry
technologies software
CATIA and even though it doesn't matter
I found we've made them all whole number
or radii and they're all linked together
so if you move any one part you can see
it moves the whole section so these are
also set up so that they're offset by
1/8 inches so that they can be rigidly
welded to each other to give you
stiffness in the direction of the truss
and I developed this trust with holding
on so you can see how this two wraps
around and offsets and weaves through
itself to get its rigidity and plane
mentions for the articulation of the
interior of the house I start with those
loops and connect from the north side of
the house to the south side of the house
from loop to loop and that gives us
these kind of four cards that inch where
they pulled through each other
north side of the house we'll use some
kind
translucent curtain wall system visit
channel last channel care and you'll see
the trust looping through the house
through the north and then up South
facade it's a pig and you get these
large light wells which bring light down
into the courtyard boil in the summer
time is limited right here to the set
directly south in the winter it will get
a lot deeper into the core area what
happened with with the house is we've
got kids they're not so yummy but
they're they're seven and nine and for a
while we had all these giant pieces of
plastic roto molded plastic around the
house like rocking horses let things go
behind the boat play houses all single
objects made in the roller molded
plastic machine which is uh you make a
mold and you stick the mold in an oven
and get it hot and you pour plastic
pellets and then little tumbles around
with the plastic notes on the walls and
you pop it out slow it takes like ten
minutes apart very very cheap for
tooling so they make kids toy palette
and it's UV stable recyclable and
recycle just seemed like a great
filament material so I said you know
facility ax why don't we take the kids
toys and start collecting toys and I'll
scan them will compose them the computer
I'll use the robot to cut the joints
between them and move them together and
we'll build all the interior walls out
of recycle so you know who knew but
something called a great approach from a
company called candlelight he was
bidding on some of the elements in that
other house I showed you we saw this
model and he said hey what are those I
said they're plastic bricks
recycle toys we had make that a product
so we came up with this blob loss system
where instead of recycling the toys we
just invented our own brick the brick we
invented it's a hollow plastic brick you
can see it's about three feet in a
triangle and it's made with three loads
so one look can kind of nest in between
the other two or you can rotate it and
spin it to start to get really funky
rusticated besides like in the
Renaissance pilato then take these
bricks and arrays them in patterns
across surfaces and then find the points
of intersection so each brick will
usually intersect between four of the
bricks
sometimes more and we take this line and
program a robot with that and we put the
brick on a jig and the robot cuts away
the part we don't want we recycle that
and assemble bricks one on top of
another so it's it's rethinking what a
brick is or rethinking what
so instead of a modular element that
gets them stacked with mortar this is a
very precise brick which interlocks with
its neighbors instead of being a very
heavy fired masonry system this is a
lightweight easily transportable system
it's hot
that's the robot I can show you video
cutting up some of these things it's
pretty fun but this is the robot that
cuts the world bricks you can see here
how they look when they're not yet
assembled this is an early one we did
remote go is what we did that actually
just stolen Thor was deported I keep
trying to make things that the populace
wants but the this system although it
wasn't that we invented it for the house
idea is using it hotel lobbies use it as
a tool and use it as a garden wall use
it as a room divider we've sold now six
over two in our world
horrible purchase people this is us
driving around now
[Music]
this idea would be better outside than
inside and then this is a giant when we
feel it sire and I kind of know what's
wanted to make so we just made giant
palabra
and for the Biennale in Venice recently
we're going to send to block wall system
systems and actually decided that I
would go back to the first idea of doing
this with recycled toys so we took toys
from different manufacturers stand up
the little box over the scanner scan
these things in the computer built the
surface mash out a little you know for a
them in a pattern and put them on the
robot
[Music]
instead of to assemble into furniture
tables tables
