so welcome everyone to tonight's lecture
from Vela we've been looking at viola
around all year as along with caÃ±izares
one of our associates visiting
professors bill and gala have been
directing the non-stop schedule at
workshops talks soon and exhibition not
so soon a conference and tonight a
lecture all under the banner of
interferences a project that seeks to
reframe and disrupt the contemporary
discourses in digital design now you
probably know this already because
you've been perhaps a part of one of the
studios viola this pot here which in
reductively simple terms has attempted
to set up a series of inflation's
between volumes and graphics or you
already know this because you
participated in long workshops deal with
has organized examining augmented
reality and experimental image
transferring techniques or you already
know this because you've seen any number
of the recent large-scale installations
developed by viola along with monstrous
activity nd Museum in Los Angeles at
Park Bomi in New York and Gracie
in Columbus Indiana for the 2019
iteration of exhibit Columbus so if I
can just assume that you already know
viola or at least you know her work or
at least you're about to instead I would
just provide a very brief comment about
one particular aspect or work that's
both extremely interesting and I think
indispensable for the school at large so
this is
and I use reading I guess one way to
describe what viola does is as an
attempt to orchestrate something that I
would call a non total design process by
non total I mean to say that violas work
involves the invention of design
processes that seem to deliberately fail
to circumscribe the entirety of a
project's narrative you can see this in
surface based image experiments like
catching or screen printing the rapid
supported volumes whose formal objects
are derived elsewhere you can see this
in experimental material fabrication
processes like robotic hydro dipping in
which the precision of CNC scripted
movements inevitably fails to account
for unpredictable fluid dynamics or you
can see this in the general methodology
in which the blind spots of standard
software in the novel project becomes a
radical proposition of computational
architecture itself we should remember
one one of the underlying
characteristics of any computer is that
it requires a reality to operate in that
is on a certain fundamental level
computable
and the more computable the human
reality is the more useful its computers
become now this principle suggests that
perhaps the enduring narrative of the
computational architecture shouldn't so
much be the story of people trying to
figure out how to make architecture with
computers but rather this little process
of rendering of architecture computable
in the first place this is a story that
provides us with contemporary building
information management platforms like
Revit we're seemingly disparate concerns
such as global commodity supply chains
and wall sections and the performance of
the Sun are all rendered mutually
computable it's a story that lurks
somewhere beneath any of the recent
innovations in digital fabrication that
promise an ever more predictable
fidelity in the translation from
information to matter and it's an
explicit narrative of parametric isms
total and totalitarian ambition for a
computable threads direction between the
smallest architectural detail on one
hand and planet Earth on the other so
with the disciplines long dream of a
totally computable architecture and in
fact a totally computable reality is its
historical backdrop the OEL is playing
out of non total digital processes
serves as a kind of short-circuiting of
the underlying politics of the computer
itself the images that fail to resolve
their supporting structures in software
platforms that fail to speak each
other's languages of robots that fall
short of anticipating the intricate ways
in which was a floating graphic drifts
across a pool of water
violas work returns the limits of
computation or the edges of the
computable processes into scenarios that
undermine our perceptual faculties and
encountering these difficulties of
perception we're perhaps showing a
version of the world has made a bit more
difficult to compute
versions of ourselves as slightly less
total computers that was actually the
entire lecture I'm just gonna follow
that up we'll see with some images thank
you okay hello everyone and thank you so
much for coming again thank you for this
for the very generous introduction
further thanks to Chris yeah students
for making this project possible
[Music]
thanks of course to the school and my
colleagues to support friendship over
the last few months that I've been here
just to quickly update you on our
two-year project so far I love and I
have successfully writing for workshops
with the participation of yelps and
fantastic student body in our invited
workshop leaders I'm delivering the
first lecture in our series gala will be
delivering a similar talk next semester
we're also planning exhibitions of our
respective research projects in the
member gallery next year and a companion
symposium that's all in the planning
stages
don't write that down but many more
exciting things to come in the near
future
okay so we talks today titled assemblies
on volumes and graphics I want to
demonstrate that through a paper focus
research project one can derive the
thesis about architectural culture at
large
the simplest hidding refers to a kind of
current mood of collective thinking and
contemporary design that has to do with
the collapse of representational issues
and digital fabrication the volumetric
in Grafton concurrently are kind of the
excuse to focus these more abstract
concerns on a series of design exercises
it should go without saying that is a
designer I begin with visual issues and
the premise that geometry is an
expressive language capable of
articulating more theoretical concerns I
wanted to put a few disciplinary
questions on the table with us top now I
wanted to show design work and research
so you can probably think of this is
somewhere between a lecture and a
discussion in the bracing work I will
start off with a paper short great
biographical narrative talking about the
past
to get here then I want to go through
the reticle argument that will serve as
a conceptual framework for the images of
it with images from an air and their
project that's I got looks it looks at
the contemporary status of digital tools
in architecture it suggests a few
questions a few key questions for
aesthetic discourse and digital design
then fast forward to now and you get two
recent projects one
I want to talk about those projects
through the lens of some design theory
conserving the contemporary conceptual
landscape of architects using digital
tools and fabrication processes to
explore geometric organizations and
lastly I will end with a series of
projects that are more in the realm of
pure research training workshops
experiments in the studio and my
personal work that I've been doing here
at Milton
sure
deeply enmeshed and the design culture
cup city
shortly after school I worked at
purposes for a few formative years these
are three projects that contributed to
the most during my time there I was
quite lucky as to these projects are
actually built which can be sometimes
rare when you work in an experimental
design focus for my purposes
I was also very fortunate to be a little
computation and advanced technology
there were four buds they are the time
for women actually who primarily worked
on the design of facades and a true
spaces for all the projects that will go
through the office
in the very limited time that I had
outside the office I was also working in
these multi-layered information
[Music]
I was really interested in
they're based information
making these drawings over that was
strange Lina and
[Music]
patience which are typically only used
for CD set to prototyping and
fabrication and other construction
related phases in these works I was
interested in these legislation of that
information as a visual exercise so
working in LA I was clearly caught
between two worlds as many of us are
when we deeply care about architecture
but need to establish ourselves as
emergent practitioners I was in this
very intense environment of computation
investment digital tools knows deeply
invested and how they would lead to
practice but it was also still very much
engaged with experimental visual work so
I hadn't nourished a question that stuck
the paradox
okay so here's ready to set up in top
and one question that I would like to
offer us something to struggle with
the emergence of visual programming and
object-oriented programming paradigms
open-source computing other accessible
platforms proliferated or just between
up pretty high ways so here's a simple
google image search of projects frequent
keywords digital design and architecture
so starting off as a scientific
exploration the emergence of code weight
code base design and digital design in
architecture did not really work you
parallel with other other critical
frames of reference so in other words
they did not engage with the discipline
in meaningful aesthetic spatial or
visual visually focused registers and
you had developed a particular style
brain that is currently very
recognizable as such that kind of
isolated and even hermetic mode of
thinking can be intuitive and image
spreads like this one here but this
paradox is intense in unison we see code
base design actually has president and
visual art theory
famous article systems effects our
theories Jack Brennan addressed the
influence of tech
interferences with the advanced part of
his moment he attempted to illustrate
the cultural transition structured by
the influx of technology but looking at
minimal minimal in conceptual art and
it's varied actions he argued that the
technological transition could be
thought of as moving from object
oriented to systems oriented ways of
thinking and seeing in other words he
senses shifts in interest from sames
themselves to the way that things are
maybe it should be clear that this is
not like art that glorifies technology
per se
Burnham argued that the modernist sudden
impulse needs to actively participate
and relate to technological means of
research in production fair enough
but architects may be too comfortable
with this way of thinking at this
present
so one could argue that in our present
condition in the wind type of
computation for out the speaking
privileges the pseudo-scientific project
and oftentimes lacks integration with
platforms related to other visual
cultures so there was a growing very
problematic cultural resonance play I
think we went through a serious face of
widespread anxiety and frenzy after the
first digital turn in architecture maybe
we haven't recovered yet so there's been
a lot of speculation confusion my
opinion has our cadets try to
renegotiate a healthy relationship with
additional tools of software I mean
we're still going through the transition
however I think we're at least past the
adolescent years in that relationship
and canary engage in that conversation
in our productive ways in my own
reinstallation with a digital drink
during my time in practice and currently
I started to look at Mel Joaquin Osteria
attitude for alternatives the critique I
presented so far
spanning sort of over the last 10 years
of summit design if one we new styles
have been developing passively even
accidentally it seems to be a kind of
style for in both camps actually this is
the history here you driven designers
and the algorithmic ones are the digital
processing one but it's refreshing to
read Burnham and Mel Bob never talked
about the 70s in similar terms in his
essay dr. Hart in serial order is a
method and not a style I found this to
be encouraging to read about the time
when the discipline of art was looking
to withdraw from associations of style
or maybe redefine it maybe systems can
be styles and styles can be system
see reality has to find my back there is
a recurring theme in my work as a broad
term it generally defines as a number of
similar or related things that are
structured and sub sorted sequence for
bottner see reality is concerned with
the order of things and not move their
execution so he goes to step further car
burners burn under clear proposition he
further illustrated the significance of
this mode of thinking by separating it
into two types artists at simply mark a
series and car does that embed the
series space methodology within one word
I had to keep working the latter one for
example so here's what that looks like
they hope you find this as productive
any relevant as I do
this is a group of bullying Dickens
women de Kooning women seven of them
among many many where I think it's in
the hundreds
according to about their de Kooning's
investigation exemplifies our that is
based on a theme with different
variations
de Kooning lead at the same subject was
like deviations each time therefore
creating a body of or related to in this
case abstract expressionism so we're in
the realm of sigh of the ER Jasper Johns
on the other hand they've done the right
operated with simple logical
prepositions it's color top of it as
shown here use conventions that have a
beginning and an end a closed system a
known closed system presumably have a
vetting of the alphabet thereby
establishing the work as serial within
the artwork itself embedded an
infinitely serial so this was an
attitude according to doctor a kind of
methodology which is an opposition to
style fast forward to the early 2010's
CNI as years to write successful
extensively on aesthetics and culture
wrote a book on what she considers to be
three primary dominate aesthetic
categories the most compelling
was a proposal for instead of the
difference we appropriated from the
sixties and seventies conceptual art
movement which mofo was a pioneer so she
describes its aesthetic projects of
difference as something that emerges out
of variation information and even
forensic evidence in this library
she sketches out a parallel between
literary theory in a social art her
studies of difference arose having art
criticism the looked at work which no
longer was the best virtuosity work that
wasn't spent about use of data objects
things actions and performances work
that represents a great from classical
particle that starts apart and the cult
of the genius the singular genius so
again we're talking about things like
conceptual and process aren't here and
here's how that works take for example
Elinor and teens blooded the PO Box on
the left the box contains and blood
samples from under poets and associate
hunting's work had a personalized
narrative approach there's also no
collections of data at Yoshi's work is
another example that speaks the same
format stains the image on the right
1876 76 change from mixed media such as
water here
both of these artists work exist as a
type of collection the set and
assemblage somatically unified into a
series by the concept of evidence or
forensic light information another
famous or even famous example is to show
curated by mal dr. which included four
identical binders that exhibited receive
phone calls and purchase orders rough
sketches notes another related
documentation for our artists apply this
information but not the actual final
works themselves the lists of data are
very well-known to computer programmer
in fact it's the basis of any code to
declare you variables at a certain level
of abstraction conceptual art is
actually not far off from writing code
or scripting logics to journey to
generate some work on a conceptual level
the system's approach of the work is
therefore one that performs on the very
characteristics of unity and the
repetition of
reassess this automatically renders the
work mathematical in spatial so my
argument through readings of nine back
near Birnam is that serial modes might
provide a certain kind of appreciation
friendly designed this horse with a
model for aesthetic evaluation a
conceptual grit which almost and the
transition Fame that we currently
occupied somewhere specifically or any
other example the night
argue that relationships of units and
system can provide a performance of a
judgment that fair work to be successful
it only needs to be interesting so this
is entry she's very small fires in Ville
in this piece Russia showcases series of
fires and one image of the glass of the
the one unit that destabilizes series
such as it can offer window into another
version of the set or background by
which to evaluate their relationships
between all the other images in the
collection this is a series based work
that it's hardly expressive in any
conventional definition but one that is
undeniably interesting so I wonder if
certain strands of contemporary
architecture might take hues from nice
reading of conceptual art and move away
from the cult of novelty with that
framework in mind I want to talk about
an earlier project of mine that operates
in series employs line drawings as
clusters or units of visual content this
series comprised of eight or maybe nine
objects depending on how you look at it
with Berger mentioned Times fellowship
exhibition at the University of Michigan
stomping College of Architecture the
ninth object of the top right hand
corner is inserted into the series as a
deviation or rather distraction is
something that not unlike with shades
glass of milk here reaching
recontextualized effect in the physical
manifestation of the deviations in the
image and left the drawing has have been
actually write it out and become
something more experimental with other
in nature
so before I talk about the
three-dimensional objects in more detail
I want to elaborate on the drive as I
mentioned earlier I've always been
interested in my drawings and the
distinction between drawings as
representation by drawing as information
in this project I was focus on the
representational aspect of the drawing
as it plugs into our current modes of
visual production that it's 3d models
that reduce multiple drives from a
singular object
though there's very slight undertone of
digital information individual catalyst
but I'll talk about that more in there
so the use of line carries with a new
level of simplicity but it's very
important to make
I mean what could be more elemental in a
way similar between my drying some
painted surfaces these objects offer the
visual effect of motion tracing
movements from the picture support to
the picture plane the Tracie specialized
line drying the topmost layer of these
objects the white linear one does the
most work to create the illusion of the
illusion of depth while maintaining
three-dimensional sculptural effect
although static in nature the appearance
of motion is mobilized by the
directionality and continuity of the
clusters of parallel lines almost as if
they're errors to slowly guide your eyes
through these movements the plane
tonight clusters are not just right are
not described in frames of motion but
rather traces of motion as they flow
through a directional index although the
clusters of lines then can change
direction frequently and in times
overlay they always maintain a sense of
continuity there are no end points in
these compositions the Lions terminated
the boundary of the drawing or the
boundary of the sport and by support
here I referred to Michael for a
definition of feeding support as in the
host of the painting content the
relationship is best illustrated made
and the French fellas she began this
works so the lines never break they live
stream like transition from one inclined
plane and this example horizontal to the
next these virtual planes are not in
classical issue but they suggested two
percent type of event the continuous
line transition from one piece to the
next as it draws a composition that
again reinforces the idea of tracing on
a flat picture plane so this is another
way that I was attempting to specialize
architectural eyes blue design drying
the diagram on the left as described by
adult Arnheim demonstrates the ability
and the desire of the eye to read
movement as an extension of lines here
denoted by the dotted arrows and not the
actual movement which is denoted by the
solid arrows and enhancing even call for
it on the right pleased with visual
perception fields in similar ways these
diagrams challenge the premise of the
figured continuous line by juxtaposing
two different ellipsoid forms with one
another but always maintaining an
implied aperture between the two so back
to the ninth objects the deviation from
the signals from the series i similarly
tried to negotiate a less expected play
between mind depths of space
in this example the picture plane is
slightly displaced decoupled from its
host and disoriented its firstly placed
on the floor and while it still
maintains its verticality it slightly
rotated and separated from its support
to create another zone of spatial play
this combination of white lines and
white translucent planks produces an
architectural specific drawing that
invites the viewer to observe it from
different points in the gallery
revealing itself over time the drawing
has I hope been transformed beyond the
pedestal object or the end up or to an
expanded field of spatial illusion as
it's both virtual and it participates
with inner space the line in this series
are not only charged with producing
effective tonically but also with
creating compositional qualities in the
flat picture plane support or in other
words the frame there are two things
that play here one competing processes
over the
this example attempts to have the
physicality of the sport embedded in the
structure of the drawing on the other
hand the drawing itself is framed in
such a way that is simple tediously
ignores the picture support and hope
that the perception of the image object
can be flattened out another key factor
in the construction of the balancing act
it's the dialogue between line and color
in an attempt to dissipate the
physicality of the surface it occupies
there's typically five liters of color
fills line creates its digital
information into all these terrains each
one playing an important role in the
emergence of figures negative boy
misalignment another graphic in silence
maybe how tight around the architecture
to this to the discipline of fading I'm
interested in the phenomena of hedges
again there's just focus
so serious gleam that they're funded for
there are two fundamental categories of
paintings paintings that are based on my
drawings and paintings they're based on
the immediate application of color fills
so here I'm specifically focusing on the
application of paint black and white
lines and this
as architect started to adopt techniques
from a team they challenge the code the
older repeatedly binary image I'd found
graphic fields and the direct
application of color
so lime drawings and renderings changed
from black lines that can find a
boundary to implied white lines the
described areas between zone and this
one seemingly trivial
an example like the figure to the right
can no longer be perceived as having a
boundary they attend dition disappears
into the optical field of the artboard
or printer paper in our conventions of
macing drying filter white usually means
something like void let the void of the
white water paper so in other words
there's no outlet for it simply an
accent through which the paper shows
through as a visual placeholder
in the art world however as drawing
started leaning sector eternity
white wines we're not restricted to the
same status to illustrate right Tom
please
maybe if I Trombley engages the physical
as subsequent visual emissions of the
shrine by using white chocolate a
blackboard so you and similarly the
sculptor printing back draws lines and
acrylic
and uses interior architectural spaces
media
the series milk works as a mini
meditation on the articulation of white
or negative lines an institution to
exist in the physical world these are
just a few experiments that use
but remove material from solid stuff in
an attempt to create in tiny conditions
where the line becomes I sleep
efficiently so that sounds paper ground
distinctions
so luminosities lie somewhere in this
interchange between physical
as it emerges from our digital processes
and workflows this brief snapshot shows
several primary states that the line
moves through during the production of
the shine
through a process on rigid material the
lines and color no longer belong to the
final image they're now integrated with
the properties of the support so this
diagram shows a layered structure
because of this particular job so this
breakdown shows the structure locked up
to claim that simply of linear in the
kind of information the very first
printed later to the far right as a
solid weight fill that functions as a
mask to hide and reveal two different
states of material of materials fantasy
the rest of the layers are then
sequentially build one on top of the
other until the final figure emerges
thereby establishing a clear route
through the vert tool to the material
the esthetic objective of the scaffold
however almost for just an intimate
relationship between structure and form
the white so later to the farc list or
in other words the mat is the first mark
that creates a figure in the field the
second layer the first layer white line
the second image to the left completes
the figure around but gently softening
the edges of exclusive that buying of
the figure from the first layer so the
color fill layer adjusts and buries the
transparency and the quickness of the
printed support material component of
the B's it's made of two layers the
black lines on the white lines is then
finally into the separate layers without
the sequential concept atlas color line
materials or conversation just outline
these final in linear elements would
simply be a subscription sitting by
dropping a different surface so I'm
going to give you the full magnified
analysis of the physical manifestations
of these drawings don't suppose the
capacities of the line beyond beyond new
drawing and representation these works
for me complete with notions of
repetition similarity variance and
relief the drawings become especially
attainment between material and article
problems as the top layer of lines and
the discrete frame bound opposition
underneath and the bottom layer crimes
as they - lead wrap around the
underlying support the ghostly traces
the be transfigured sometimes comes
together
do it like and that other moments remain
separated and distinct layers although
there are many optical and technical
variables in play here as shown the
final work still operates in response to
the collapse of painting and drying a
temporary culture of architectural
representation needless to say these
issues go beyond to my modest
investigation the architectural drawing
is a tank is in this unique place I
believe as we collectively learn
categories and defining boundaries
between what is instructional
representation approximates documentary
and that which is fairly driven by
technique
[Music]
as a continuation and sometimes
deviation from this research I'm going
to quickly show two projects both down
as collaboration was mine sometimes
collaborated on her side this project
title transfers is located in the
sculpture in this web server called art
by mine and get near it's about three
hours in of Sigma York City it's up for
two years so next time you're near I
recommend to make some time to visit dia
became something and oh my the basic
premise of the project is that the piece
should read little thread of
architecture elastic studies in our
conversations with a curator we decided
that it should we live in urban tower
situated in the woods there are two
primary sources of inspiration for the
project the image on the Left shows
volumetric almost eerie atomic clusters
projected or dragged through a two and a
half the environment they made on the
right is from a really extraordinary
show of Michael Hedges work at the
Whitney music
kold-draft next two men trained in this
exhibition as you build massive stereo
Tomic forms out of aluminum scaffolds
and herniated board the panels are so
extreme with apples obstructed images
that hazard to the most southwestern
landscape contextualizing went 8
graphics on the interior of the gallery
be a geometric the organizations from
informal perceptive theme of the project
was they reconcile that crystalline
faceted geometric Maxim said he was
buying work 2d drawings so in in the
form he can read the influence of hi
giant expense and then the graphic was
more inspired by Catholics Americans
extend the composition and maybe also
make elevations over print hours at
night as we've seen
so this is another early Heiser
installation here the forms show
evidence of prehistoric architectural
configurations the later Kate shape and
his monumental City project in this
example however this continued use of
extracted photographs of the desert or
other landscapes as an analogue texture
map here's a form generation diagram of
the piece here the idea was the next two
volumes inside of one another on the
second route the drying you can see a
kind of carving operation on the outer
volume to reveal the in your figure and
on the third row a sequence of
compressive forces that begin to kind of
push the volume in on itself so we're
really interested in the stereo Tomic
expression but when it comes to actually
making the piece it's made out of thin
planes just like Tony Smith and Michael
Kaiser's work is often managed by wood
or thick board so the project was
sponsored by Korean solid surface
materials so we've we also created a
corner to state court adjourned aluminum
structure to support the Korean
following some of the fellowship work
that I showed earlier each men of the
thinking of the pieces printed using a
flatbed commercial sign printer the
beast was designed to be flat packed and
shipped in the back of a small team so
there's also like an economic
justification for this for this project
in the loo and then make up the project
and its assignment to get a cart so this
is the piece under construction we use
the very talented Fulton 1/32 of an inch
and the fabrication assembly of the
piece the simply want to thank you to
the serration that we're going to the
strengthen the work with very low tech
tools and with just the two of us I'm
saying there's some connection details
where the aluminum water jet structure
means the question they know for you
know thought it was important to
actually Express the hardware and to
show the connections between the parts
and the different material systems so it
should read like the continues shell
from far away and like an assembly up
one of the better use of anything is
actually from the back of the piece as
shown here you can also see how the
graphic not sort of misses there skips
off the quarry and narsing I mean
there's another theme of the work early
in the top as well how graphic map talks
to its three-dimensional support or in
other words frame so the conversation
between drawing material the material
assembly is what hopefully motivates
them here to study the piece in the
round the 360
okay so geometric posture is my
network's tectonics surface into
equations and so on can be illustrated
here in a little bit of a larger scale
this next project is currently in the
prototyping and development phase we
presented our final design in January
and the piece will be constructed down
later this year in August so the
pavillion is for the upcoming ends of a
Columbus Exhibition in Columbus Indiana
many of you may know about Columbus it's
a mecca for modernist and postmodernist
architecture the town has worked by
materi that River
I am a in others our piece is going to
sit right in front of New York's area in
this first Christian Church a new
landscape designed by Dan Kiley when we
put our initial proposal together over
the summer times we started with two
lines of inspiration so do you like to
conceptual drivers first we wanted to
imagine the series of architectural
forms as wireframe wireframes and our
skeletal constructions so volumes
redness lines and space the second thing
we wanted to do this for was how
architecture might give shape to extract
natural systems so we're thinking about
the ways that we in popular culture
conventional needs of Natural History
and ecological networks
it was exciting to start to consider
program with this project as we went up
in scale from a formal perspective we
looked at artists that work with selves
a little frames the question for us was
can an architectural structure be
expressive and again there's also this
idea of form as a diagram of course in
that way a question that I like to think
about it is how can when compose with
physics can one subjective form to
virtual or simulated gravity as a way of
generating schemes thinking about the
pavilion program over there summertime
we're reading the number of philosophers
interested in materialists and
ecological theories think there's asking
asked their questions about our
relationship to inanimate things part of
the reason we wanted a more visually for
its massing is driven by the other major
element of the project its program has a
full scale in the very important area
the basic material idea for billion is
that we are co-opting ready-made
assembly logic from greenhouse games so
a combination of off-the-shelf
components and receipt machine precision
fabricated parts the actual enclosure
will be clear
structures and for the carbonate engines
the panels will be cut to match the
primary and secondary structure elements
of
on the interior we've designed the
planar arrangement of print
raishin for its artificial lighting of
fabricated serene during the day the
installation will be exciting forgot
sirloin Club encounter and social
gathering during the evening the
structure would be illuminated from
within here were actually going to
inspired by the glass volume on top of
different works are we knew you'd be if
you haven't been to Columbus you may
have seen
seesee continuation of some of our
earlier work in the geometry of the
civilians maxing the same distance
accidents or atomic form rendered and
lightweight structural system in any
reflective skinny's so turning to the
shapes of fabrication were designing the
pavilions frame is a kid of interlocking
flat digitally fabricated components
we've been very fortunate to receive yet
another corporate sponsorship from
Autodesk for our project as we search
residents and their bill twisting Boston
were now developing prototypes into
pending court flows for the Sharks
refrain the plan is to fabricate the
framing elements using a CNC tube
bending machine so each frame will have
connection watching those into its
geometry so again you want to minimize
labor-intensive on-site assembly
processes such as like precision welding
for example so our plan is to
practically the panels such as the
entire pavilion fitting and flat packed
and transported to our site
in this room you see us working to
optimize the amount of unique radii at
each main 20 moments for example to our
fabrication pieces as that digital tools
can easily accommodate an infinite
amount or an infinite variety of unique
parameters like radii and length and so
on but for our interests in research
were aiming to land somewhere between
standardized production and 100% custom
fabrication so we see the pavilion as a
model for something that is potentially
scaleable here's a physical model that
we built for the design presentation
maximum in the model itself you can see
how we're starting to think about the
construction relationship between
multiple elements such as planar
arrangements wireframe the linear linear
expressions formal articulations and
surface conditions
okay so I talked about
first part of the lecture and some more
formal and graphical motivations in the
second part in this final part at the
top I want to conclude with the project
that attempts a convergence of these two
drivers paddy Ryan's take on graphic
roles and how do those graphics and
volumes start to communicate with one
another
this final project titled poppy red
should be looked at as an ongoing war
movie suitcase driven rather than
production of specific artifacts I
originally started working on this
project as I was writing an article on
discrete geometries and the reappraisal
of the digital to the ad magazine issue
89 which is going to be out and he
writes this April so building on some of
the earthly earlier thoughts and see
reality
specifically seeing nine in this article
I expended on the monitors mention of
part-to-whole logics in this
investigation I also turned to burn on
the torus composition theory which is
concerned with the imminent conditions
of what is already in the world so the
theory opposes existing things in non
hierarchical and non totalizing
organizations as opposed we started like
modernist transcendental model to
illustrate that our literary uses Thomas
Eric Sanders work so this work is called
a very long title
this form in the lungs elements like
droplets along the strains of a
spiderweb he uses this work as a visual
metaphor that resists hierarchical order
the center points and instead create
highly intricate conditions of nesting
so the work celebrates interdependence
of different elements into flat
ontological schemes this composition
based method of working and evaluating
even is what makes our shadows like
ousts galaxies words the contemporary
theoretical diagram and visually
enticing sculptural work another
illustration of this network theory the
focuses on parts rather than holes can
be read in June resins I'm going to
research of discrete geometries in this
composition Breton aligns thickened
linear elements with some
of directionality and loose form he's
not interested in custom geometry that
belongs to one finalized thing but
rather how things can come together to
create assembly of humans so discrete
modes of operating are analogous to
bullet Orion composition project and
that they both advocate a semblance a
reconfiguration in place of creation so
instead of creation what's more the
discrete mode has evolved beyond its
original pure purely geometric ambitions
to include other architectural elements
such as graphics and figures and
tectonics these images here by our
eyelash our studies for a brief so the
study uses a linear unit varying lengths
and orientations of the unit and
composes it in a sort of statistical
manner from an almost shatter point
therefore creating assembly of clusters
of units so parts are formed into other
parts which are the nested into a
sequential composition
my project copyright is comprised of
various studies of objects models
renderings and animations that said it
began with a series of dragons so this
series is more tightly focused on self
similar clusters of lines and very
layered compositions at least in the
face shown here so you can see the sort
of variations from one frame to the next
this is part two of that study so the
idea is here for this group is to be
seen as a drawing that contains three
frames rather than three separate
drawings it's almost filming in that way
so the frames are not distinguished from
one another in significant manner
they're meant to be looked at snippets
that capture three distinct moment of
line clusters floating on to it two
floating on to a 2d plane this is the
last election from the drawing set so
the composition the composition of
watchings and these examples examples
are permutation games based on color
films line densities containers of
linear element and vector orientations
which may seem random at first
working loosely with the dilatory an
argument for not higher-order within a
composition the drawing studies are
parceled into localized sequester's but
not necessarily groups that create a
have people there where their parts that
create a continuous network the idea is
to withhold any sort of conventional
evaluative criteria at this particular
phase so kind of like typical good
drawing versus bad drawing examples
so that was the kind of like
two-dimensional cream with prints
straightforward enough but like most
architects I left drying hoodies at
social tools and this next phase of the
project I became interested in more
public support commissioned I wanted to
explore how my feedly interests clear to
respond to or resistance of show
audience
I started looking at other architects
and artists that work with relatively
simple geometries so cover them in
complex images and graphics
I was not only interested in process but
also reading the result of that process
how is Michael Pfizer in this example
able to sustain her attention would be
simple white directional extrusions what
is the relationship between the edges of
the underlying geometry and the graphic
wrapper I particularly like this example
as an images or the image seems to
follow the edge of its work quite
faintly with the exception that the
spirit saw moments when the graphic
slips or drips onto the side of the
piece I find that this blurring
condition between what is geometry what
is graphic is a contemporary problem the
visual culture across discipline
I think that those apartments were
filled as well as atmospheric pictorial
effects like the Katrina first example
on the left both belong to a larger very
very interesting graphic form graphic
form equations so even though the Sun
looking example on the far right it
belongs 60s it's anticipating this kind
of this field of interest in my opinion
these are Frank's fellows Polish village
series also from an earlier era but it's
still useful as a useful example of work
that it seems to productively entangled
color fills with geometric supports
having the use of color have to be
different ways we in-depth that figure
so maybe less serious or formal in terms
these examples show graphic massing and
volumetric operations they're reveal
different effective properties of
objects and prices example on the Left
uses a solid color as a boolean
operation to further emphasize the
surface or texture condition that is
separate from the form itself
so I send this image on the right tells
a similar story of graphics or surfaces
that can be denominated from the volume
with their host of it
[Music]
this more recent example by weight that
Union Kelly Walker on the Left
illustrates yet another way that
graphics and volume such an interaction
were in strange ways
in addition these examples show evidence
of graphic processes and digital image
hairs that are comfortably uncomfortably
bridge the gap between the virtual
screen and the material world so digging
into more digital processes makes
intelligence work on the right spatial
axes what we currently referred to as
texture mapping or UV mapping in the
digital environment so here's how that
works the flat graphic pieces which are
hung on the walls are constantly being
projected onto their reflective surface
objects which are placed eighth floor so
the images are being projected in real
time onto the object as one walks around
the space the direction that the
projection is animated by the movement
of the viewer so I want to show that you
workshop with studio experiments and
have been a part of this research here I
went to Greece
temperate glass of digital fabrication
we used to teach separately as their
presentation and drying I think that
these two practices and practices are
becoming productively conflate completed
in the Academy and we said two things so
so looking at this video I think it's
important to note that also although
these tests I'm sorry these tests did
not privilege the digital physical
artifact in any way but rather I trust
trustee use want to inform the other
[Music]
these examples here soon work from a to
act digital fabrication classical
tablets Jeff Hoffman we carefully
integrated the form generation and not
have rendering techniques fluidly
through the two different axes through
different softwares
and here you're looking at a
cross-section of student work from that
video exploring the hydrogen which is
popularly using custom and emotive
culture athletic gear at during Clemente
and other similar things so this is a
collection of former renderings and hide
your dead physical artifacts using
vacuum transports and 3d prints the
students in these workshops and seminars
explored the idea of printmaking with
CBD substrates in this set for example
faceted 3d prints would be draped but
other field graphics suspended on the
surface tension of chemical baths when
the volume rushes through the fluid
graphic material logics would have
produced this unpredictable
relationships between the form in the
graphic so this line of material
experimentation is also informed by the
use of digital tools so again I'm
exploiting the material behavior to push
against the precision of software such
as the platform does not over determine
the visual
this is a render that this is a rendered
image of 3d passing study that has been
placed up to a 2d canvas with some
painterly and graphic content
superimposed onto it so the virtual
equivalent of the Hydra different back
so similarly though the Hydra defeated
me in this event we can see the 2d
superimpose graphic projected directly
onto the 3d form while you know the
access to very precise and mechanics in
these workflows the geometry itself can
be made by expectedly as you tried to
forge relationships between these two
different representations the render and
the actual geometry of the 3d object so
the moments of misbehavior for me our
moments prefer their pronunciation what
reads as a digital process error to meet
you be refreshing especially within a
contemporary visual culture that is
saturated with high luster high
resolution imagery so precision can be
an unproductive constraining in our way
back to copy read this image is a table
showing the parameters of a head
that initiated the 3d version your
development can be read the Left column
lists different processes techniques and
methods that I used to dress a fixed
volume with variations of graphic film
so this particular set for meeting
various combinations of these techniques
15 times
you can see varying degrees citizen
control material agency insurance
operations at play you may also note
have fidelity to the vacuum positive
user ability to read the graphic as a
rap like decal or color scheme embedded
within the volume itself so these
artifacts primarily borrowing drawing
and printing procedures from graphic or
industrial design on the more precise
end of the spectrum there's also some
very slight traces of just like high
finished commercial processes like the
Hydra dipping zones vinyl perhaps and
in this diagram you can start to see the
logic supplying graphic and material
finalization as an attempt to operate me
on one stop mode or modeling like you
gotyou forms so the design of Michigan
stood in the center region can be great
for characterizes graphic content which
seems to follow up to grounded and
volumetric clusters so this is less a
study and more of a credit or
architectural composition the follow of
the to do film similar to some other
operations I talked about earlier
produces unexpected moments in this
graphic form choreography and this
close-up view you can see the direction
change and the line clusters slightly
misses the edges of the geometry toast
agon zoomy now it becomes clear that the
graphics all sometimes causes alignment
with the forming transformations of loop
as the volumes inaccurate way but
challenges and sculptural qualities of
those forms in favor of graphic figures
so this competition becomes a official
narrative form or so things are taken
out of here in the perspectives that I'm
going to show you my street slides are
the relationship between the graphic
artifacts in fragment geologically
floods and volumetric organization
broadly speaking the project is an
attempt to discovery new relations
between contemporary visual trends and
disciplines for referral to
architectures so graphic design
animation riveting but also the built
environment something beyond the
tabletop object so abstract and
experimental the study is selling it's
still in its initial seasons so the
series is meant to investigate visual
principles that could be extrapolated
into full-scale architectural proposal
you can think of these as rigorous
investigations into the sculptural
spatial properties of mind right here I
hope that hints of that miss Martin and
friends and that they're visible again
well the word relies on advanced digital
tools or an architectural computation
and the animation or film industry like
the zebra student painting environment
for an earlier for example it also takes
cues reports or art theory in every
architecture like the references would
have sprinkled through at this top as a
final design composition papi wears
geometric agenda is a tent indebted to
the house let's put forward by
contemporary sculptural worked in
particular I'm interested in here
opposed carefully calculated sculptural
contortionism and her investigation of
geometric posture like Bob's word poppy
red employs volumes that have undergone
a series of transformation America in
other words architectural figures in the
state of transformation change so to
conclude I'd like to pose today's
lecture as an attempt to participate in
a digital trajectory that is part of the
continuance smoothly involving discourse
on the relationship between technology
an aesthetic theory this discourse is
not free or post digital it's not first
or second way it embraces technology
code base assign material processes and
their disciplinary representational
conventions I know that sometimes not
taking it as a minute position can be
seen as an invasive stance however
within the larger practice that my
researcher with the STS first juice
professorship I'd like to Sage it as a
productive bridge between two cultures a
culture that embraces technology and the
first principle and the one that begins
its architectural propositions with
historical precedent and theoretical
positions thank you
[Applause]
[Music]
and let's
so a little bit of background the
original and this is also important in
terms of the emerging practices and how
we start to work through these problems
and notice that I was stuck to work like
and kind of transforming from sort of
like architecture model which is
something that is out there it's larger
scale than like the tabletop object so
we originally thought of my there was an
earlier iteration that at the ablest
museum we originally thought of that is
having some sort of transparency so the
structural frame of the project also was
meant to have an expensive
wasn't Africa stressful conditions in
the work so with the budget tonight
allowed for such things so we started
your week degree kind of like the the
solid panels with the aluminum frame but
then in the second or the next project
the mixtape Oklahoma's project
we started to work with that idea
earlier on we started to recalculate or
recalibrate the project with those
design decisions so it's not always I
mean this is like
very conventional in architectural
practices but we started to renegotiate
the material conditions with the linear
expressions in terms of like the volume
are lying I think it's like it's
somewhere in between and I think that
the kind of the transparency and the
receptivity
surfaces for the Civic illumise model
specifically and I think it's such that
it can start to sort of like challenge
the visibility of the structural frame
so sometimes it showed you leaders lines
and maybe on the interior even more so
on the outside and how much agreed more
like the kind of like a shallow form
good cancer
thank you
[Music]
and in a very artificial way and I think
and this is something that maybe like
we're starting to work with a little bit
more with further potential proposals so
the original piece of the my example was
speech on a 20 foot by 25 somewhere so
that was the ground initiative we were
working with and it was very simple it
was kind of like a simple problem to us
and then in the second iteration of the
project that I became slightly more
complicated because of sudden we were
dealing with kind of like we did not
have the first iteration of the project
so we started to integrate that with the
graphical under each other it's like the
pointed graphic onto the form in the
exhibit Columbus example I think we're
starting to work with that even further
maybe because it's a requirement would
be because we find that as a natural
development of swarm or as a natural
perfection of the work because we're
working with Dean
20 twins
it's a work in progress and I think this
kind of idea of going from sort of like
three-dimensional 360 digital space to
making these objects do things a really
important step for important way
investigating these kinds of works I
think further like challenges this the
premise that the menti where the ground
takes over or which determines the work
I sort of like challenges in the
productive way so it's a feminine
community relationship
[Music]
that's true that was really lucky and
you and those two brats
and
then your work with
all over
is geared toward
it's
yeah
[Music]
there's nothing
fine
just collinear attention to
I think
sometimes
you're distracted
laborers
motions
the positive
the dedication
and later on that by thinking that the
two possibilities
when we show us our words they're close
to the edge
or close reading
intro spectrum of potentials neither
in order to spread
material
I've seen your word never cease
relationship
this
this is fun the beginning but this is
not offensive but I just wonder if who
you are you so aware you make
not interior
we describe
whereas
that's pretty
I don't know that it was intentional
by
in our
probably less than one today
and I just
and
well I I don't I don't know that I've
placed those parallels so they're worth
enough see nose hair
so i heard sheriff i can t move of the
I think the like I am I do have like a
sort of fear sight here
articulating these ideas with
architectural examples as a way of kind
of like falling into down conventions so
English
smaller scaled a little bit larger to a
little bit larger and is a way that I'm
trying to investigate that kind of scale
of attention
rigorous investigation through our
philosophical preferences rather than
architectural project but I think like
some of the things that I was talking
about earlier in terms of like digital
tools and how they engineer to feel
I think and the reason why I take only
references I think things like
we know those references
medium
are just so
competition for that
with me
makes that
exactly
aficionados practice
staying very close
there's like okay so there's so that's
where the serial mode of working I think
becomes interesting because it's such
that you have different units different
elements and you're looking at the work
relationship between the unity element
so that I kind of like ties into like a
sort of like basic and should be looking
at things like quickly looking at nine
things and an image which is not one and
it just more important than the other
it's about looking at the overall thing
right so I think maybe like I haven't
really thought about when the time comes
to remove one of those as an expiration
set you develop that further and we're a
place to touch up in that scale like I
haven't really thought of that yet but I
think
yeah I think those interesting seriality
particularly and relating back to late
revealing
super interesting
I also like
sometimes
vectors
straining like
it's
it's how I
[Music]
so
something that's like really really
important to me as I develop these kinds
of work closed
I think the thing that it would like to
highlight and maybe even more such of
the students it's a sort of the
information workflow or the sort of
information from testing things testing
things in like physical artifacts via
digital processes understanding the kind
of like the structural framework digital
processes and how you share something in
the digital world and how you translate
that back into like the physical
artifact so I think with that that's
like the kind of like the method that I
like to use in order to avoid becoming
too embedded too enmeshed in warning
process or my software or some software
that offers only one particular thing so
I think like it's actually like really
working to try to show that to me but to
show a certain
very easy were taken advantage are less
through like many different platforms
not necessarily just felt the same
morning so I think like the kind of like
the the translation between vector
information to raster information I
think that those those that also helps
likely to not become constrained or
remain within one particular software
coding is important but I actually think
that's a really mean way to think to
think through these problems as well as
like you know we are no longer operating
outside of the digital anyway so
thank you sometimes
