[Applause]
sound okay good thank you and for the
gracious introduction as the one who
typically makes the introductions for
these lectures it's funny to find myself
now as the one who's introduced so
before taking on the mantle of the
lecturer or proper I'd like to take this
opportunity of this first lecture to
introduce and frame the series for the
quarter as has already mentioned good so
I didn't already mentioned the theme for
this quarter is territory and with the
term territory it's really intended to
one speak to the fact that all three
sections of the school somehow deal with
the notion of territory as a kind of
geometric description of land in one way
or another but also in the idea of
territory of disciplinary territory what
it is that an architect does versus
landscape versus urban planning and
trying to understand that confines of
our territory its opportunities and also
potentials for rhe territorial ization
the speakers in this series of course
I'm the first speaker I'm part of a
tradition in the school that we have one
of the KSA faculty lecture as part of
the series I am in that position now
other speakers for the quarter we have
coming up are Monica pumps to Leon the
new Dean at Michigan mateus bow who's a
Dutch architect who does very
interesting work that the intersection
of urbanism and landscape
and architecture Roberts someone who's a
formal faculty here who's now the
chairman of the department of
architecture at UIC in Chicago karbala J
who's a influential source on the
emerging debates around the notion of
landscape urbanism Doug Stockman who's a
leading practitioner in the design-build
film feel-feel coming from Kansas as
part of the AIA honor Awards keynote
lecture and finally garth myers who is
representing city and regional planning
in this series talking about the
informality market in African cities and
so the series as a whole as as typical
as meant to talk to the different
aspects of a school but one one thing
that may go unnoticed in these KSA
lecture series is that they're
officially called the Baumer lecture
series and there may be possible by the
school's generous boundary endowment so
I'd like to speak for a few moments
about this gentleman Herbert Dahmer I
personally never knew anything about him
who he was or who he was so I did a
little research into the school archives
Herbert Baumer was a longtime professor
of architecture here at Ohio State he's
born in Alabama studied at the bows are
served as an armored lieutenant in the
First World War
after which he finished his diploma in
Paris at the bows are worked as a
designer for separate in Van Allen the
firm best known for the design of the
Chrysler Building in 1922 he came to
Ohio State as both professor in the
university architect in that time he
designed a number of buildings around
the campus the porter memorial library
Arbus hall the chemistry building in
derby hall many men served as a
lieutenant colonel
the air course of world war ii and
return to a high estate where he
continued teaching becoming an emeritus
professor in 1956 having looked into the
Falmer files i found all sorts of
interesting documents lecture notes
teaching contracts letters of
recommendations one thing i'd like to
share with you tonight is an article
that he wrote in the 30s discussing what
was the most hotly debated topic in
architectural academia that is the
relative worth of historical versus
modern styles and and what was
interesting that he finds primarily the
work that the modern is its value and
instruction to quote from dhamma having
no consecrated forms a teacher in
dealing with it that is the modern is
forced into an analysis of things and
into a line of reasonings about them
that makes clearness and logic and it is
the things that are clear and logical
that can be readily taught and i find in
this sediment a kind of like mom and the
hope is with tonight's lecture to sort
of offer a clarity of thought in my own
looking at architecture and for the
electric series as well to sort of keep
that notion of clarity of our visitors
in mind as well so then finally to the
lecture proper claim-jumping what is
claim-jumping to illustrate i will use
an example from deadwood an HBO series
that focused on the outlaw gold rush
town of Deadwood in the Dakota Territory
in the Senate in the 1870s as creator
David Milch appointed out repeating
interviews the intent of the show is to
study the way that civilizations comes
together from chaos so what we have here
is Al swearing and in the middle who's
the sort of big boss of the town and
he's trying to create a sort of claim
jump as it were the outline of which is
that he has the puck trying to start
land to the dandy the owl and the Punk
know that there's no gold to be found on
the land so they're basically trying to
sell him a work
Blandon but as it turns out there is
gold on the land and a lot of gold so
they end up killing the punk and trying
to buy back the land from the dandy we
have to kill the dandy all this around
various machinations involving propriety
and more significantly territory so the
dictionary definition is to enter a pond
and speak possession of lands which
another has acquired a claim by prayer
entry and occupation and I think and
what I'd like to do is take that notion
of claim jumping from its mineral roots
and apply it to architecture so the
title of the title is claim-jumping our
architectures prospects for change and
to try to articulate and delineate how
architecture has changed its territory
that is plane jumped in the past and
continues to do so in the president in
the future as a means of making
architectural civilization that is
disciplinarity come together from chaos
as I've already mentioned tonight's
lecture in my own is like many other
lectures from chaos a faculty and
they're intended to provide a means for
the school to understand the breadth and
depth of its own production in relation
to the rest of the field represented by
invited lectures since this occasion not
only works my promotion to associate
professor I just got the official letter
this morning which I'm glad to get as
well as assuming the role of
architecture section head it makes sense
for me to speak to both this lecture
also marks the five years that I've been
here at OSU and to commemorate the work
that I've done
time to rally which has been my primary
form of production I'd like to offer
five histories that I've written over
the course of the last five years these
will be sort of footnote or collisional
versions of these arguments the first
history deals with the relationship of
program to form and this essay began my
first appearance at the KSA at this
lectern in fact at a conference on
program that was organized by Jeff
Kipnis in November of 2004 shortly
before I began teaching here the lecture
also became an essay that was
subsequently published in practice
praxis under the title notes on the
adaptive recent program the essay starts
with the observation made by the
architectural historian John Summerson
that it is program not geometry or
material that marks the novel
achievement of modern architecture I
then explained in the essay how the idea
of program itself is an unstable concept
an idea that undergoes constant revision
by various architectural ideologies and
that the best way to understand program
is in its adaptive reuse in taking the
term adaptive reuse here from real
estate terminology which means a space
that's used for something other than its
intended purposes the prime case in
modern architecture of the idea of
programs to be found in the adage form
follows function and the best example of
this idea I could find is mana costs
rostov Club of 1927 and here that
on the left and it's the idea that what
you see are these the ranks of the
auditorium coming out of the volume so
somehow expressing the form of the
auditorium much like we are now with
that with the angled floor to facilitate
view becoming expressive on the form but
in looking at it further what I found is
that typically modern architecture had
two other manifestations one within the
the mutant accommodation of program in
the case of somebody like the bees we
see below or in the case in the use of
program from one activity to define the
form of another as in the case of curb
receives use of the ramp which was
originally appears in his design as a
way of transporting cattle in a
slaughterhouse but thing gets we
situated as a part of his architectural
promenade and this sort of inability to
successfully replicate the modernist
does desire actin a form follows
function generated in the development of
architecture need to formulate the
position for architecture V to be
function which did not replicate this
problem so it could be argued at this
point of contention for the advanced
architecture of the 70s where architects
like Peter Eisenman Robert michurina
Rossi in various degrees turn away from
program and to form using to form into
images into the city respectively as
replacements for programs I think I want
to say that the idea of program gets
picked up on again in the work of people
like REM koolhaas and Garcia and their
reading of something like Bentham's
panopticon and it's with the
dissociations of programs that are not
concerned primarily with their formal
disposition but with their diagrammatic
arrangement this meaning of the diagram
by the way of philosophers like Michelle
as you lose hasn't turned and formed
architectural production in relation to
processes of formation but this
engagement has moved in time
increasingly away from the insights of
diagrams of power instead to diagrams of
materiality and I think with some
suggestion that the productive
unachievable attea program in its
implication and form is not something to
be resisted but is rather a kind of
productive problematic that needs to be
engaged again and again and in the
footnotes I tried to sort it all out but
also in the next history I try to reread
the same issue from a different
perspective and this was a piece that
was written for us issue of perspective
called monsters and with it I responded
by creating a kind of dualism which can
be read here you can see here which is
intended be read as both ruination and
rumination and it's the play of these
two terms that the history was written
around the first term of ruination that
I intended was basically an observation
of the architecture of the seventies
huge concerns see here we've had a lot
form and in different ways either
through the literal ruin of something
like sight or the Evoque ation of ruin
and is something like gary's work or the
notation of ruin and something like
venturi or or Eisenmann in different
ways sees this sort of recurrent motif
of the ruin appearing formally in the
work in the second iteration of
ruination which has to do with the
causes of ruin I want to suggest that
this move to the motif of the formal
ruin comes out of a sense of
impossibility that one found the project
of
architecture in the seventies in the
example of basically servants perceived
failures at that time so here you have
things like the destruction of crude
aegyo which could be seen as a failure
or the social program of housing the
destruction of McKim Mead and white
Pennsylvania Station which made way for
at Madison Square Garden could be
perceived as a failure of history the
fire but mr. Foyle's dome in Montreal
which could be seen as a failure of
Technology and finally the fire or
rather arson call Rios an a building
which could be seen as a sort of failure
of pedagogy so these two conditions I
think start to apply the second term
this notion of rumination and rumination
here means basically a kind of cyclical
thought thought that occurs again and
again and what I want to suggest is that
this dual condition of ruination
precipitated this third condition of
rumination in terms of a cyclical
thinking as the kind of generative
moment for the emergence of
architectural theory in the 70s that
theory of the 70s becomes a way of
ruminating over this perceived failure
and a kind of cyclical affirmation of it
in capacities and then further go on in
the argument with the second valence of
this notion of rumination which
rumination also means the sort of
ingestion of non-nutritious materials so
well how eats the grass who ruins the
grass eating this non nutrition material
I want to suggest that there was a way
in which there was a certain sort of
configuration of thought in the
seventies which we seemingly moved
beyond but still somehow haunts the
discipline I didn't go on to try to
describe the state of current practice
in the form of zombies which are both a
sort of model of the rumen because
they're ingesting material that's not
for them it's an active repetition but
in another way suggests a kind of
positive constructive model that comes
out of the zombies and that it's really
all about a sort of mom emerging mob
intelligence that I think a lot of the
work responds to and I think a lot of
the contemporary work we see something
like a Randle ashes entry into the ps1
competition from a few years ago is
reenacting the these haunts from the 70s
in a way that is in a way very
constructive but in a way also removed
from its initiating arguments that I'd
like to suggest is comes from a small
piece that I wrote for a former Lefevre
fellow Gimenez lie to describe his work
for his into your show and if you're not
familiar with Jim's work when they are
basically cartoons of visionary
architecture schemes that use outlandish
conjectures like what if the teleporters
for Star Trek were real to re-envision
things like what that would do to the
global distribution of goods when
intriguing about Jim's installation was
the title that he chose for which was
called no place or the architecture of
no place which of course to me created
this sort of thought about what he meant
by no place and of course when you go
back to thinking about utopia or the
definition of the word utopia utopia
actually means as he as he points out it
means no place it doesn't mean that a
good place which is also neat opium with
spelled with an e anata you in the Greek
which utopia t means good place this is
the thing we're going trying to go to
but the utopia that we always refer to
that utopia you
is an odd place I thought there was a
very interesting tension in his own work
the model that I wanted to use to try to
describe Jim's work came out of comics
themselves and it has to do with this
idea of continuity in comics the thing
about comics like superhero books if you
will is that they exist in this universe
and that the idea of continuity is very
important so it's very important that we
know that the Superman came from Krypton
enough to Mars that we always refer this
come from Krypton and we don't pray
inconsistencies within that universe and
so what happened within the discursive
universe of something like DC Comics was
that at a certain point in the stories
have been told so long and there's so
many different versions of it that the
story started to conflict so what they
did is they had this big event this
crisis on multiple earths where they
took all these stories that happen on
all these perfectly different earths
where people are going back and forth
and they consolidated it doesn't even
remember Beppo the superchip give it got
rid of them though and basically
consolidated the universe the comic
universe into a single narrative that
had structure cohesion and continuity
again but the problem with that was that
one of the interesting things about
these comic universes is that people
want to read about how these characters
interact in different situations so by
creating a sort of realm of absolute
continuity they limited the potential to
tell weird stories like what if Superman
had come to Russia instead of America
and what they did is they made a new
series of comics a new imprint that they
called Elseworlds
and these were ways in which they could
tell stories about the same heroes that
basically existed outside of continuity
they offered models that could
that their stories but wouldn't
interfere with that and and whatever
they saw in Jim's work was that wasn't
really at no place but it was it said it
was itself like one of these Elseworlds
where the detritus of visionary schemes
could be reworked as alternative
histories where the mega structures of
say of the 60s we're not dismissed as
impossible but rather implemented a much
larger scales the vocation of his work
seemed to be entirely useful not as a
failure topia as they always are but
rather successful impossibilities which
point to other real possibilities
the next piece it's been published this
year a couple of times first in
thresholds which is that you might each
do the journal and comes out of some
work for a seminar that that I did here
at OSU called design for the apocalypse
and basically the question that why the
apocalypse now was based on a kind of
survey of the field now with things like
2012 coming up and this oppose it into
the mind powder or things like global
warming all sorts of factors we see
missing a kind of active imagination of
the end of times the the apocalypse so
you can see on things like on the
History Channel there are no longer just
histories of what has happened but now
with computer animation told
documentaries about possible ways the
world will end so this seemed like a
kind of cultural fascination that I
wanted to try to address in some way and
try to think about what it could mean
for architecture and what I would
propose is that the idea of utopia has
been an active motif within
architectural thought or with design
thought the notion of a progressive
and that would happen over time if we
worked hard enough and waited long
enough but then as we know from gems
work or other that the utopia is always
an odd place it was never it was always
always just beyond our grasp and what
I'd like to suggest is that instead of
utopia actually think about something
like the apocalypse where if utopia is
is no place the apocalypse as you write
it is every place the thing about the
apocalypse as an idea is that it's
ubiquitous and unavoidable it's not it's
also a fantasy in a way but it's one
that is about ubiquity as opposed to the
removal of the future removal that you
would have for something like utopia and
for me it suggests is not that in a way
we literally design bomb shelters for
the apocalypse but when you start to
look at apocalyptic thought as it
manifests in movies and novels and all
sorts of matter is that the apocalypse
is always encoded not as an end of
things but as a an utterly new and
complete beginning of things so like
with the Mayan calendar it's not the end
of the world it's the end of an age and
the thinness starts another age or even
if you take it to things like there was
a book written a couple of years ago
called the world without us which
basically just catalogues what would
happen to cities buildings if man went
away and the end it's really not about
the room
and it's it's about the way that without
man that earth would start to
re-regulate its own the system so even
in with something as dire as that it's
always about a new possibility beginning
yeah another thing that I think the
apocalypse for design makes us think
about is that if we looked at something
like architecture and ambitions or even
just in general architecture and design
is something that I think in a lot of
ways has been generated out of a sense
of plenitude if we think about
architecture is something being more
than building think about more than it's
about a plenitude of either resources or
time or effort or attention and this is
the thing that's characterized
architectural production and so as a
experiment they thought it seems
interesting to try to think about what
if instead of operating on senses of
plenitude we operated on models of
scarcity because the other thing about
this apocalyptic mode is that things
become very reduced you have to rethink
situations and I think that notion is
gare City over like the true and radical
scarcity could be an interesting way of
rethinking certain sort of formats of
architecture spots the final piece is
one that I was supposed to be done now
hopefully it be done tomorrow
there's the little work to do and it's
written for this year's entry to the ps1
competition as won by moss which is
Michael Meredith and Hilary sample to be
published in Domus and so but basically
the argument is that Moss has entered
this competition three times before
winning this year and what I'd like to
sort of set out is that they
set of entries offers it as a set not
only a trajectory of their own
development but a kind of commentary
from the genre that the ps1 competition
has become for this audience are
probably no doubt familiar with the ps1
competition it's been around for 10
years it's been repeated that a number
of times so that there are now
observable trajectories to the kind of
solutions that's been suggested in fact
Michael Meredith written a piece for
praxis charlie exactly these sort of
occurrences of format and so what I
think would their work having seen this
trajectory they're not I would say not
trying to offer radical alternatives to
what's been done before but trying to
twist the model as it's been
establishing also to use that
opportunity to comment on the field at
large so in this entry from 19 are from
2004 they have this open netting which
provides both the canopy and you can
crawl along to it as a sort of lounge
space and I think it serves its function
as it were to operate in this
competition but also I think is a
commentary on both the continuous
surface projects that we've seen in the
last 15 years and the green roof
projects in terms of its inhabit ability
but you know it's both of those things
but it's also open etc etc or in this
example from 2007 where they've made
this canopy out of these inflated mylar
balloons which gives you one this sort
of an impedance ways in the wind but
also can be understood as the
achievement of a kind of dynamic
intricacy but one that operates out of
materiality as opposed to form so you
can see these on YouTube if you watch
the video the sway of the Maya creates
the sort of Polaris
Shen's not as a complete image but as
these sort of micro textures of the
light shade as it moves and glimmers
across across its across the form and
then there's finally this year's the
winning entry which is again another
version of the king of the canopy
frankly this is the part I haven't
written yet so we'll leave that really
methylone for now okay so having written
these these essays it means certain
observations or assertions there's
another history that falls out of this
previous effort a kind of de facto
shorthand of where I see architecture
today that builds on these previous
efforts and this sort of mind like
current synthetic gesture towards these
previous efforts so let's start with a
crisis because all good histories tend
to start and end with crises and here I
have to start with the oil crisis of
1973 things are going to pick up a
little bit
and out of the oil crisis we could see
that there was a kind of bifurcation in
architectural intelligence into two
arenas so here we have basically
autonomous architecture represented by
the by Peter Allen or underground
dwelling represented by the sort of
passive energy arguments and that I
think in this moment has been the
attention Department really took on the
one hand this sort of theoretical formal
autonomous
on the other hand the sort of energy and
performance issues and sort of like
division occurred at this moment between
these these two trends and then of
course as I've mentioned other arguments
out of this division you have people
like men afraid of de furry here in this
this drawing made by the architect Aldo
Rossi called the architecture assassin
and she drew specifically for this with
my friend furry where you have a number
of commentators but primarily somebody
like men afraid of deferring who speaks
to the fact that architecture has gotten
very good at it it's aims to address its
own language as a form but also has
their in lost a certain kind of
connectivity to the world at large and
the way we went for it to first to this
and another essay is the architecture of
the boudoir the boudoir being the realm
of architecture in which pleasures are
enacted but they're also confined in his
point is that this verification is
absolutely complete so there can be
architecture which he thinks in a way is
great and there can be something like
building practices but they're really
two different two different animals fast
forward a few years we have something
like Dubai which we all know the story
very well it's seen this sort of
incredible amount of growth if I have an
oil-producing nation itself but I think
its wealth is predicated on olive oil
which in a way sort of mirror image to
the oil crisis and we've seen
that in and collaboration of building we
see the enactment of any number of
architectural ambitions that have been
built up over that time in the 70s when
architects weren't building I should
take in the thing about the oil crisis
and that division between autonomous
architecture and underground buildings I
would say is that removal to the Academy
where in the academy architects worked
on issues a form and now with the new
levels of capital the fruits of that
research now have a chance to be
realized and built and it's a sort of
collection of of that pent-up desire to
build things in the world that were
forged elsewhere but again I think in a
way I would say there's a kind of
apotheosis of that moment and you see
here to just make reference of something
like Al Gore here in Inconvenient Truth
where he's showing the effects of global
warming we've also seen the collapse of
markets and other things like that so
that the capital and convenient and I
would say again the platitudes which
enable a certain kind of production to
take place are now facing another set of
issues that call into question not the
validity of production but it's very
possibility in that same mode so the
Madinah I would say the dilemma we face
now is sort of you know this dilemma
here we have the painting by Thomas
called architecture dream the architect
on the column surrounded by the
monuments of history
looking through the possibility here you
see another scene from the video game
Fallout and the question is how does how
does architecture operate in this kind
of change of circumstance as it were and
what I'd like to suggest is that you
know as I get further along I remember
parts I left out so with the thing about
the ruination that we talked about
before all these things this notion is
described as kind of death
death of architecture is what I like to
these are crisis models however you want
to discuss it like this notion of the
crisis or the end of architecture the
end of whatever these are sort of
cyclical occurrences and what I like to
suggest is that when we talk about the
change in the architecture that rather
than thinking about architecture has a
complete narrative continuity from the
pyramids to the Seattle Public Library
then instead we realize that
architecture what we call architecture
which this thing that we give the same
name to again and again might actually
be an entirely different ontology they
might be entirely different conceptions
of the stuff that surrounds building and
thinking about buildings have totally
different argumentative structures have
totally different ambitions and then in
fact we go through these quite
frequently and then we did model we can
imagine that there was
and in the beginning of one kind of
architecture in another point and again
and again and the question for me now
and I think it's a question because you
think what this is what is the next
iteration of this architecture thesis
and how can we start to to think about
it my answer for that is something I've
been kicking around for the last year is
this new Casualty mob and again the
title is is meant to be on the one hand
like a casualty like another death of
architecture but to also evoke notions
of causality to think about like what
are the causal effects of what
architecture does how does it rethink
its engaging with the world and its
productive ambitions but then also not
to encode it within the sort of dire
parrot of doom and gloom but they
introduce a kind of lightness and a sort
of casualness of engagement with these
things so this next iteration of the
architecture thesis wouldn't oh these
these ideas and I have five points that
I would like to make to that end of what
I think goes into it and the first I
think it has to do with how they explain
and understand design and it has to do
with making quantification count here
you can see an example of a very simple
diagram that if it were to the right
scale and it's not shows the relative
aspect ratios of different forms of
audio-visual interfaces and everything
from an eye
to a widescreen television and beyond
and in that simple comparison i find it
very productive to understand the
differences they apply much more
instructed to see it in a graphic
version than to be those whose numerical
aspect ratio is there so I think
basically seeing the qualifications I'm
starting to understand those ambitions
what we should focus attention on here
you can see something like the square
footage of a person calculated in terms
of their relative size for areas around
the globe or you can see something like
in this diagram made of Rice University
where they've basically taken the
perimeter ring roads of various worlds
and situated them one on top of the
other so you can really start to have an
understanding of the comparative
difference between these things and
start to engage that matter or an
example of something like this which is
a Reedus ssin of a project by a
celeriac for his Babylon project Reid
ascribed by work KC as part of their 49
cities project where they take the
formal aspects of the design and try to
break it down into a quantifiable set of
measurements the other point or this
point has to do with building on that
rational design understanding of
quantity and quality in the field to use
that knowledge further to reimagine
systems so this isn't just love this
image this is this is basically a Google
Earth image of Moses parting the Red Sea
and I think this kind of scale of
ambition is is a bit where we need to
start rethinking systems and that can be
everything from something like this
diagram and we can read we can't read
the caption but the caption of the
diagram is basically cities make weather
so to start to understand the
that the relationship of the systems as
they operate to other examples where
like in this one where the description
of the natural object through geometric
rigor or in something like this which
was a came out of a mathematics study in
the principles of stacking and what the
achievable cantilevers are through
different means of the building blocks
sort of looking at this material yeah
and trying to reimagine the
possibilities that come out of it and
into this project which is by Matias Bao
who will be coming here in a few weeks
for one architecture where they rethink
the whole notion of the park and the
landscape around the idea of the circle
but in a way that the circle is Congre
with systemic needs for the vehicular
circulation and other ideas
the third point concerns a topic which
we could say the topic formerly known as
function and that we need to use
instrumentality in our work so in
architecture we sometimes get caught up
in the cultural resonance of our
production and I think you need to
reconnect us a kind of brutal clarity
about our means in our hand this panini
maker is both the product of a society
and a cuisine that connects to a certain
culture but it is also a simple machine
to smash together a sandwich and
introduce you quickly and I just like
it's bacchiocchi
here's an example of somebody smashing a
metal cube to make a chair I like
because it was brutal or we can
intervene
then add value to seemingly prosaic
situations with the use of design
intelligence let's take the scheme here
by my architects again for their oda
orders house it can be described as an
atom is a ssin in the house into an
assemblage of self similar repertoire
form but can also be understood as a
pragmatic response to an issue of
building here in the pyramidal forums
are he chimneys which allow for passive
cooling by the use of the heat chimneys
phenomenon fourth points to the issue of
carats which is have it looked like
something else
this diagram explains what's known as
the uncanny valley if you're not
familiar with the term the uncanny
valley is this has to do with the
appearance of humanity and things like
robots and puppets and what a points out
is that like basically there's a good
response to basically a person and
there's a good response to a puppet but
things that are too close to the human
but not you create this with known as
the uncanny valley and i think
architecture can respond to an engine
like the uncanny valley by taking two
sides one we could focus on the extreme
right in which we would sort of work on
the exact replications of the existing
conventions of building quad building or
perhaps more interestingly we could use
those conventions as a loose location
like in this suggestive example of a
city constructed out of cutlery or
similarly a city at a plastic bowls or
in this example by the danish firm PR
angles group which takes the diminish
single groove which tastes the
dimensional format of Legos also a
Danish project product to provide both
the means of constructing the model but
also as a guide to suggest specific
architectural figurations in which
tastes are used to maximize solar
exposure throughout housing complex
finally the final point would has to do
with what I would call them with stone
out of the architect and that is the
need to act like an architect to
describe someone as an architecture to
say something that they are the one who
is responsible forth for both the form
and the content of the new think of
Irving Kristol as the architect of
neoconservatism well Robert McNamara as
the architect of the Korean world for
Viva Vietnam are for Phil Spector as the
architect of the Motown wall of sound
these are all for granted good or ill
originators and facilitators of
unprecedented forms of organization the
architect operates in a variety context
in a variety format in drawings and
texts and schedules and conversations
well unites these expressions is the
ability to organize the means it can
into something that commands both
attention and direction there is a
reason why the invocation of architects
bring forth associations with vision and
control is because architects and
architecture itself operate as the
embodiment parks allot of the man or
woman with a plan weld only what we do
this goal is trained evil to lead the
world we should not apologize for that
but should embrace it and claim it so
then where are we now as a profession
and as a school in some way to be like
the farm protecting ourselves from a
rising tide of
but kinda sandbagging of internalization
well we needed them way off the island
model and a means of navigating this
turbulence the world is changing
economically environmentally and
culturally these require responses and
not speculations in the face of these
changes architecture is confronted with
its own unique dilemma it is blessed
with a great legacy of thought
technology technique that responds to
the world but it plays an increasingly
diminished role in the creation of that
world while each generation of
architects has positioned its on crisis
these she now is not stylistic for
disciplinary not the type of
architecture that the continued
existence of architecture itself
architecture is challenged by the
ongoing acquiescence of area the ongoing
acquiescence of areas of professional
responsibility to more nimble options
and even more profoundly by the
delamination of its own conceptual
formation in the past the question was
how to define what architecture might be
now the question is what architecture
might do as a model I lived to Kamandi
the last boy on earth what I want to
suggest is we architects the school
architecture are like commanding
community is you don't have to Mandy I
guess you don't command he was a comic
drawn by the heart is Jack Kirby
it describes the last boy on earth in
this sort of post-apocalyptic world that
he exists then he's literally the last
Neumann and he has to make his way in
the world
in this basically what I would call kind
of read territorial eyes yeah
this image shows the world of humanity
it is a map that should look both
familiar and foreign to us is the world
based on the basic outlines of our own
but one that has been realized by new
features and new constituencies and I
would like to suggest that we like
Kamandi are already existing in this
Reed territory alized world here you can
see when using humanity as inspiration
than the poster this fall but due to
copyrights we sort of claim jumped it as
it were but within the world at large
and well down to what's in the school
that's what I'd like to say is what's
presented tonight is part of what we
could say is a voyage already well
underway but the school itself has
already been retouched or Elias if this
is not the description of a new
condition but already a process
continually well underway our education
is uniquely positioned to address this
condition not only in the training of
its future practitioners but in the way
in which pedagogy pedagogy provides new
models for the profession the school's
mission must be rican sexualized the
teaching of architecture architecture
must resist the continued elaboration of
its internalized codes and re-establish
itself with his productive and
projective capacities the redeployment
it's conceptual legacies the
strengthening of his technical
competencies and the retooling of its
techniques in this territory in the KSA
and in our respective duelist
disciplines of architect
they've been sitting vigil planning we
continue as we always have to vote our
energies to such an endeavor it is an
ongoing effort the journey of discovery
seemingly without end but one that is
continually necessary by way of
conclusion I would like to offer my
gratitude to the school but students and
faculty over the last five years have
given me a context to be an architect
that historian and an educator and to
think about where architecture has been
and where it might be going also to all
of you sitting here tonight I appreciate
you listening to my efforts in this
regard
so I usually ask the first question out
of whatever I thought it's pretty good I
don't have any questions
[Music]
Jane
sure I think I think that's a great
question
I protect you I mean basically it's like
out of this lecture how do you respond
to architectures continued possibility
amidst these other pressures of things
like environmentalism sustainability
things like that and what I want to
suggest is that I think architecture and
the other field but I'll talk about my
own for the moment I think it's it's
both necessary and inevitable and but
also aside from that important I mean I
do think architecture has and continues
to play a role in thinking through these
these factors in a way in a way that
continues its own long trajectory but it
also reformulates them and I go back to
the way in which I think you know
architecture has its foundation within
the art and science of building but also
I do think that it's continuation out of
that spawned the kind of model for
thinking about design I think it's a
kind of foundational model for thinking
through the problems and issues and
possibilities of design not only for
itself but I think for culture at large
so what productions given an
architecture maybe I think that other
fields is not only the design of the
thing we do but the possibility about
thinking about how to do these things in
ways that are unprecedented novel but
also intelligent so I think in some ways
you know the answers we come to the
things aren't simply the answers that
come transparently out of material but
provide ways of thinking
I mean architects think synthetically
about lots of different things
and I think what I'd like to say is the
primary value of architecture is both
its history and its experience with that
synthetic thinking that will be applied
again and again to another set of issues
so like basically I think the difference
between now and the seventies that I'd
like to suggest is that in the 70s the
bifurcation was absolutely complete so
people really focused on like the solar
building and they did the bank and they
got to a certain point with a problem
that doesn't have an answer so similar
to that issue a program like you can
never find the conceptual model that
completely allies form and program
together but it's a continual dilemma
that gets rethought in different ways
over time and I think architecture and
its engagement with thinking about
organization and design offers models
that continually review based on new
problems so I think you know whatever
it's a bit mealy not to say that we'll
do it better
because we'll do it together but I do
you think the movement now is not is to
both specialize and be particularly
agents but also to retain architectures
ability to think both and instead of
either/or it's a long way to say any
other questions
can you put it like a jeopardy can you
put them in the forms
now I understand the I mean and I think
this notion I think your rifle is there
so the casual and what I'm trying to
suggest I think is a is as you say a non
dialectical model where the occurrence
of certain possibilities that come none
necessarily generate the architecture
but participate in the architectures
form are admissible evidence so for me
it doesn't matter it's the heat Jim the
idea of precedes or follows the
pyramidal form at some point they're
coincident and so it's just as
reasonable to talk about its formal
characteristics and its performative
characteristics one doesn't obliterate
the other and I next and I just think
that's a shift in thinking from
something like an essay that I found
very useful because it's so utterly
clear on the model it's something like
Eisenman's post functionalism which i
think is a real bad weather in the RTT
it's the most precise articulation of
the arguments for autonomy because it
gives you a little italy of things that
are involved in a parka texture
structure program etc etc but then
because of their inclusion but not their
speaking to the essential qualities of
architecture become inadmissible
evidence in discussion of this other
thing and so what I would want to
suggest is that the possibility is to
talk about this other thing of
architecture in relation to these
factors as opposed to being negative
find against it and that's just I think
where I'm trying to shift the argument
no I think that's fair I mean the long
history to school now everybody in this
building has come here since then but
like there was a studio that Bob saw and
I did together and Revere's ago when
he's still here
which was called lazy and undisciplined
and the students joked that basically in
the end it took a lot of work to create
the effect of laziness and indifference
and to do this thing so I think this
casual doesn't you know I wasn't the
surfer clearly and with you talking
about me I mean and even in that example
it was through effort intelligence work
I would say design that the ease grace I
would say casual attitude towards the
wave or precipitated and so I think
there's a connection between those that
I would want to hold together other
questions okay thank you very much
[Applause]
you
