I'm Joe packs president of AIT Columbus
want to welcome you to tonight's event
this action is my first event as
president of a I'd pompous and very
problem all the AI comest members here
to in attendance good to see all of you
as part of tonight's been I would like
to thank my girl Hill construction and
the builders exchange for organizing
this event and allowing a Clemens to
collaborate we've got a lot of great
team education programs that happen
today and tomorrow so I think I know all
of our members collectively are very
thankful for that opportunity
one before further introductions of our
keynote speaker I'd like to thank Rob
Livesey and professor and former
director of the Knowlton School of
Architecture for his assistance in
bringing our keynote speaker well bring
her here tonight my present pleased to
present one of our key sponsors for
tonight's evening and for our past
design professionals Knights Dennis
Hopper was inside Outfitters dennis has
been very instrumental in helping us
organize this event and bringing in some
international speakers it's been very
very successful and tonight's no
exception that with having will Dennis
founded inside Outfitters in 1979 and
has worked in the field of custom window
treatments for 30 years
today his double-bass company designs
and manufactures window coverings for a
wide range of clients internationally a
few examples of inside outdoors clients
are spectrum art hospital in Ann Arbor
sky Ridge Medical Center in Denver the
Discovery Museum near st. Louis they
have installed blinds in the only 6,000
Wendy's restaurants worldwide and in the
Palace of Riyadh Saudi Arabia quite
diverse range of clients
the Sultan is appreciative as I
mentioned earlier inside Outfitters has
long supported the design profession by
sponsoring this event and gives me
pleasure changes view dennis hopper with
and setup thank you Joe
everybody hear this okay okay I'm
pleased to introduce mr. brooder aim to
be a part of such a dynamic crowd this
evening it's really great to see all
these faces out there we'll Bruderhof
still a little bit better
well Rooter is an acclaimed artist and
architect his work is known as they
search for pragmatic theological and
practical essential solutions that
celebrate sight opportunities and the
user need I have trouble with this will
is a craft we like it is
he is craftsman Mike and his concern for
detail and building process he is field
experienced in carpentry masonry and met
were talking to will earlier he told me
he's a self-taught architect and I
didn't know that there were any others
other than Thomas Jefferson and will
told me and also a mr. right Frank Lloyd
Wright he's also self-taught and since
then I've talked a few people out here
and they told me that now you can't do
that you have to be oldest dirt to do
that maybe that's the truth maybe didn't
we'll be able to tell us
customer received a Bachelor of Arts
degree and sculpture from the University
of wisconsin-milwaukee and his self
trained as an architect and that's what
I was talking about he opened his own
studio in 1974 and his note for
inventive cultural building two new
multi-use multi-family housing winning
more than 80 sign Awards the published
around the globe his ability to raise
the ordinary to the extraordinary of
renown he also told me earlier that he's
been teaching a little bit yeah a few
other big use I found that very
interesting
please welcome will brew
[Applause]
so thank you so thank you all for coming
out on this warm evening in Ohio we were
prepared for the real Ohio and you
warmed it up I appreciate that and we're
hoping you'll hold back on the snow
until we split town tomorrow morning on
the first flight out yeah I'm not sure
if we get snowed in we'll make the best
of it as well it's a pleasure to be back
in Columbus it's it's been a while I met
Rob at Yale last fall at final reviews
and I was looking for a way to sort of
win in an invitation to see his building
and so we sort of connive to make this
happen and I appreciate his diligence
and making it happen and be loyal to
that and yours at the funding this great
opportunity and we arrived on Saturday
afternoon and it is truly a masterwork
and all of my travels of age and that's
getting to be there I have lectured it
probably most of the architectural
schools in America well over a hundred I
have been at schools throughout the
world and other than an occasional
architectural school in a found place
like the old naval facilities that in
Copenhagen or it's pretty easy to make a
cool place out of something old for some
reason it's very hard for architects to
ever achieve making a great building for
the teaching of architecture Rudolf
tried and I think failed at a certain
level John Andrews tried and failed at
Harvard rob has succeeded with being the
the great client and collaborated with
Mac and Merrill and you have to master
I know we acquired a very map but it's
it's beyond anything photographs could
lead me to understand and a long
friendship but back in Merrell it is
their masterwork as well so it was it's
been a real real treat you have
something in you in your heart that's
really quite quite amazing so again I
was pleasure to be here tonight what I'd
like to talk about today is ideas
because I think that's at the root of
everything
I think architecture without ideas is
just building I like to believe that
we're all capable of ideas I want to
talk about buildings that grow from the
outside in and the inside out I want to
talk about buildings and the places in
between buildings and those become
cities I'm interested in cities I think
we all should be we all practice and
live in a wonderful time I'm happy to
see some students here tonight because
it is it's a really special special
profession it's grounded in something
that really leaves something to the
memory of the community the reason a
community exists on the other hand the
profession of being a film director is
the only thing I think might be parallel
and that's about fantasy but also about
memory but architect has a really
physical grounding that's beyond
definition so I'd like to go through a
series of images can we sort of lower
the lights a bit that's possible in here
be nice I'd like to ramp up the images
especially get these out because I don't
have anything to read and I'm not gonna
stand on the stage and so if we can get
room dampened down ok there we go that's
better get that one ok
Bulova these are clients excellent we
work because of clients not in spite of
clients and again that's a very very
important fact clients are the essence
of everything we can become and do and
they are truly our patrons and our
reason for being so as we look at this
level at a corporate client they are in
ways different and you have the same as
that residential client or that
developer client or that cultural client
they have dreams they have aspirations
they have needs they have budgets they
have all these things and I believe that
one of the most important important
creative acts of an architect is to be a
great listener and if you listen well
you have a reasonable passion about
listening and a reasonable skills
evolved and a sense of how to creatively
understand what you're listening to when
you present your first diagrams your
first schematics you celebrate your
client and they see themselves reflected
and then you go on the journey together
it's not about the architect overlaying
his ego on a proposition it's about
letting the the differences and the
challenges and the limitations of every
different commission raise the level of
what can happen and as an architect if
you are a true listener and then becomes
the celebration for those first ideas it
becomes a very exciting journey and
again all great buildings are tied to
that great client and that collaboration
of listening it where it might go so on
the right here we have Brad Casper who
used to live down the dump
downhill from Columbus and Cincinnati
was one of the executives of Procter &
Gamble he is now the CEO of a company
called dial Hinkle and that Stephan
Kelvin from Dusseldorf who's they
side of the puzzle and that blue fall
model there is the start of a listening
charrette that we were having after some
extensive programming for a new American
headquarters and research and
development thing but we'll get to that
at the end of the evening
these folks are clients I don't know
their name they're the people that I
really work for because while somebody
pays your bill signs your contract all
buildings are the property of the public
realm by the very shape sometimes these
people will never go in some of these
buildings but when it's a cultural
building left by a library that's their
building that's who I really design the
Phoenix Central Library for us it wasn't
for the city engineer it wasn't for the
mayor of Phoenix it wasn't for the
librarian it was for the people of that
city that's a very special opportunity I
like to believe that architecture my
definition is the balance between
pragmatism and poetry balance okay all
pragmatism simple engineered solutions
something that really keeps out the
weather and the elements does very
little to raise your spirit of your soul
doesn't give you goose bumps
particularly pragmatism when you balance
it with poetry and on the other end we
have poetry and again we're on the edge
of poetry right here as we stand and
standing on the carpet of poetry tonight
I think this mr. Iseman is very much
about poetry and sometimes we wonder
where that balance of pragmatism is I'm
a believer in the balance when the two
poetry and pragmatism come on the scale
level out you have architecture you
don't have sculpture you don't have
engineering you have architecture so
pragmatism here at Murray Dells office a
desk very easily balances with poetry
and again this harmony is what I'm
always trying to strive for I'm very
interested in the past as well as the
present really interested in the future
and we learned from this past it's very
easily easy that we look at the diagram
of the Parthenon we look
ruin in mesoamerica we look at Chaco
Canyon and something that was so old we
could mine as contemporary
archaeologists trying to write our
definition in script for what that means
the culture and time and being and what
we do and will be inspired to do I think
in America when we really come of age
will be when we look at the drive-in
theater room from the 1950s and can
equate that into what this world is all
about because history is yesterday it's
not 400 years ago it isn't what
Jefferson brought us or Frank brought us
print one right right it's about this
whole evolution of knowing and learning
for the past not only to learn from the
mistakes of the past but also the
successes so that's an important part of
solving problems
I really believe as I mentioned at the
beginning that architecture is about
making community in place and
architecture is the most fragile of art
forms on the screen you are seeing two
cities of the 20th century of time are
same in two cities well on the left is a
city of 8,000 people on your left 8,000
people in 1923 a town named 23 skidoo
over death valley population 8,000 bars
and brothels schools and churches
industry homes etc and all that's left
are few shards of cans and maybe a few
foundation stones and a major
archeological investigation could tell
you a lot about what was there but the
fragility of that place of 8,000 people
just blow into the dust over the heat of
Death Valley but cities can be something
else and as you look on the right from
the medieval quarters of Barcelona here
and to the Serra plan of the late
nineteenth century you know what a
dynamic vital city can be all about and
again I think that sort of understanding
and mining is ever more critical as we
sit in the cities of America like
Columbus like the Rust Belt like the new
cities of Phoenix and places like
Jackson
they all have a story to tell and again
if we're to make cities about people we
have to sort of dig back inside
ourselves to make that happen because
it's amazing what comes together in a
city and isn't it interesting as we look
at st. Mark's Square that over hundreds
of years with no zoning with nine no
Design Review guidelines with none of
the things that many of us in this room
as professionals are constantly dealing
with that phenomena of everybody telling
you what makes a great city I guess
primarily since world war ii weren't any
great cities before world war ii we know
that we had build all these rules but
isn't it amazing how the st. mark's
cathedral and the doges palace and the
compa dolly and the paving and the
arcade all have come together based on
the good will and good intention of
culture over time and educated culture
reaching to make a great place and then
we look at the right and we have the neo
fo if you will gothic of the campus of
Yale University and Gamble's buildings
there and we have a man named Louie Khan
coming to that campus and Lane there's
wonderful intervention forming a
dialogue with the two and the old and
the new don't have to a lien eight each
other can complement each other and
again it's about the sharing as
designers and architects of this greater
meaning to place rather than ego that's
so important and again the quiet of a
back alley in Prague or the dynamic
energy of the East Islands and Amsterdam
these are no this is all this stuff
happening around us just everywhere how
can we make so many mistakes and do so
much uninspired work we live in a great
world as mentioned by very interested in
craft in the art of making things as we
look at these walls here one and on the
left and Cusco on the right at Machu
Picchu isn't it amazing that with all
the technology of the now with all the
digitally controlled cutting machines
and folding and bending
Shayne's that we could not replicate
these walls we would be extremely hard
pressed even with all the money in the
world to create a stone wall of this
magic that always brings me to on what
is new and what is it invention what
hasn't been done before in some form so
I get excited when I go to the scrap
yard of the brick brick place and I get
excited when I have a client come to me
that has a desire for a stone house in
the desert but not the budget I say what
can be what might be what in the
ordinary can become extraordinary so we
create the broken block house and laid
with basically unskilled labor we create
a house of texture and scale about our
desert rescuing six ten wheelers from
the landfill having them dropped at the
site during construction and laying this
wall that dances with a pattern and the
texture of that landscape appropriate
for place not looking in the catalogue
to find the block that looks like stone
why are we so so out of our mind always
about making a material that we think is
special huh we saw your boost up their
gentlemen and ladies of a big builders
exchange but why do we always have to
make a material that has great integrity
pretend to be another material to get
the market why is the Frick have to look
like a block of a block have to look
like a brick and split based have to
look like stone and on and on and on
right look at the mast magic of just
inventing something and the dance here
between this texture translucency here
and the Reese on pie with the concrete
some moderate mother's chairs bye-bye
nice ponder oh that's interesting so I
look at every ordinary thing you know I
mean sweets catalogs used to be for
making models you know now that we have
the computer is hard to put the computer
on the model but then we're doing
digital models so it's a whole other
world as well but we also do the 3d but
I'm trying to have a conversation at
this site for a synagogue with a very
small building budget in the early
90s there these are the laborers that
will lay the walls of my synagogue and I
had drawings and specifications and had
sort of created a narrative of how we
would achieve this but I was telling
them if they just looked over their
shoulder this is what the wall had to
look like when they were done it was
this random pattern of shaded shadow
that I have noticed on the pallets of
the Bloch yard one day at solar noon I
noticed that I felt this is important
this is way to take a block into a new
place in the Sun of the desert that was
a very sick and perverse thing that I
was trying to do into these mesas
because then these are men that are
trained to lay plumb true many units a
day they have an apprenticeship they
have a training period you know this is
their life whereas the carpenter knows
you can cut a tree in all kinds of
different shapes a block mason or brick
mason knows you lay it straight up you
know and that's their joy well we lost
about 30 Macy's the course of
construction heresy heresy and we
finally took it the superintendent was
the guy that crossed the line because he
said you got to make it physical not
intellectual because as they made the
first sample wall for this exercise they
thought they were making random but I
could read a music score it was like one
three seven eight one three seventy four
five one three seven eight the wall
exists if you visit the building it's in
the North garden off the sanctuary I
didn't rip it down with no intent but
what we had to get them thinking about
was set your string line out 3/4 from
the face if as you physically place the
block it was not hitting the string you
plummet and keep going we've done right
but never think about the act of placing
the block in the line of the strength at
the same time we were asking for this
pattern to be achieved we're asking him
to be the highest of their game and
laying a curve leading wall almost as
long as a football field so as testing
both edges and they passed with ice
cores the men that survived and here you
can see the wall and it not only brings
a dance of light in the desert but
ringback for this congregation to a
another very very important Wall the
Wailing Wall in Jerusalem so again it's
how do you build context how do you
relate to the thing is a $71 square-foot
budget in the 90s a challenge or an
opportunity what is life about life is
about light the magic of light and how
it informs and creates and sculpts
architecture and again within that
simple little synagogue the idea of
light becoming a clock to the space of
this time in place now one thing that
I'm interested in is not bringing will
bruders manner or style or fashion those
are words that I don't particularly
understand or know the meaning of I'm
interested in brain an ability to listen
and celebrate a place as a small case
study here I have the privilege tonight
and working from Portland Maine to the
Bay of San Francisco from a Lake Pend
Oreille and Idaho down to the deserts of
Arizona to a taxi yard in Denver
Colorado
all different places and sometimes when
you come from without to that place to
be within you listen better you ask
questions that everybody's taken for
granted it was fun riding with Ken
tonight for this excuse me with Rob
tonight to this this event in that we
went off into the old Italian
neighborhood just off a high street we
saw all those amazing 1860s and 70s
brick small modest houses of workers I
mean there's a building stock within the
range of a stone's throw from this this
facility that just are the best you can
imagine I mean they're really beautiful
things so what do you do when you go to
a place well first you don't want to be
found the fool right here's somebody's
invested in you trusting you to come to
this place and so they you have another
calling so here is Jackson Wyoming that
I discovered in 1991 and this is the
Tetons almost the classic poster here
with a falling down barn that they loved
so dearly here's the confused main
street of Jackson Wyoming which has no
railroad it's a bend in the road between
beautiful places Yellowstone and Tetons
down to this
River etc and they've got a false front
that would rival an ox berry farm or
Disneyland they don't quite know who
they are are the Adirondack are they
western star front
what are we they have the charming
arches of elk antler's on the town
square
a invention not long back in history but
after World War Two and every afternoon
they have the stage house stop
reenactment of a foolish shoot out of
the town square and the mayor that
interviewed me for the library that I
was trying to obtain the kick mission
for apologized because he put on his six
guns and he went out to the shootout
because he was an actor in this play
every night at five o'clock in summer so
this is Jackson Wyoming well I went
there with a passion there are now than
five buildings I somewhat transformed an
attitude about thinking which I really
enjoy now and have many friends there
and the Wyoming State Chapter the IEF
invited me to be the keynote her there a
few years ago so I guessed it made a
little difference but I got excited
about the muffin haystacks in South Park
and they became sort of a grounding of
an idea of form or the Redell
advertising agency here those haystacks
are right in that little notch just
about three miles from the site so form
becomes again the vernacular or the
narrative for the landscape form becomes
the built environment and there was an
architect that I guess had a little
drinking problem from Ohio that went out
to the West I apologize because I don't
know his name I forgot I was coming here
I should have gotten that homework cry
somebody's always gonna tell me his name
but he did Old Faithful and now that is
a guy that looked and listened and
rediscovered this was not about Ohio
this was about Yellowstone this was
about the position of the West and in
Ohio architect created Old Faithful in
and again in the inside of the Redell
building that we were playing again with
the idea of logs and what they mean and
light and so again looking at the path
the barns the a racks the fence Mad
River the Hartman barn use of metal the
tradition etc the cladding here of this
multi-use building for a whitewater
Africa
me again all these strange stories that
always amaze us the mortgage is paid by
those wetsuits nothing else that is done
entrepreneurial e in this building
none of the tours now the river riding
trips the lunch trips dinner trips etc
now the t-shirts they're there for
profit but the rental of wetsuits to run
the Snake River for this institution
which is open for months a year pays the
mortgage for the whole operation it's
not a strange world we live in a simple
gable roof on a meadow at Wilson Wyoming
becomes a diagram for a simple gable
house in the woods for Headingley Redell
completed about six or seven years ago
again the quiet diagram of
appropriateness and placemaking and
materiality and with those first
buildings that I had done in Jax that I
learned a lot of remembered a lot about
what snow and a facade is all about what
weather of this nature of winter is all
about things I have somewhat stepped
away from as I lived in the desert but
now refresh my memory
so this wall is perfectly flat you can
run your hand down it as if you'd run it
down the screen that you're looking at
these polished stainless steel
quarter-inch plate window frames with
black gasketing in loi coated apertures
again part of that skin the simple way
it meets the sky I believe very much
that the quality of a building can be
determined quite quickly by how it
leaves the earth and how it kisses the
sky you know you have architecture you
don't the skin of the carefully crafted
boards you can see the diagram where
nothing is notched everything is whole a
different proportion a negative reveal
and after all this craft after all this
intensity and thought and all the nails
have to run true the choice was not for
a coated nail but for a rusty nail and
suddenly the wall that it's so pragmatic
becomes poetic and it becomes a homage
to great minimalist painter from
Tallis New Mexico and we're looking at
that work again like a canvas as we look
at the roof the snow pleats become
butterflies on the roof the Rhine zinc
the extension of the inside to the
outside
seamlessly flowing again isn't it
interesting the difference of a black
and white image versus a color image we
are a generation of people that have
been bred to color there's many of you
in this room especially some of the
architects that have as much great hair
as I do that remember the heroic period
pre mid sixties when printing presses
printed black I fell in love with the
great colorist and great architect
Antonio Gaudi - black and white books
strange thing for a man of color and
formless he was but look at again how
this environment and the warmth of the
wood the simple plains of chipboard and
again what I call apertures not windows
define how you look at the world beyond
and again the focal point here being how
that conifer and deciduous tree forest
looked in the first photograph and now
you see that you're only in an aspen
forest because of the way the windows
were sited in the architecture looking
back so again this desire I have to
build buildings that are appropriate to
place finding and reaching into the
nuances of place finished public library
the Central Library which was completed
about 11 years ago was the product of a
selection process as was the
architecture school here not a design
competition it was twenty eight thousand
two hundred eighty thousand square feet
it was twenty eight million dollars the
biggest building I had done at that
point in my career people always asked
do anything else before the library well
this is job number 317 so there were a
couple before this building okay so this
was a budget that was about $100 a
square foot it was the central cultural
facility of a bond issue in 1988 and it
was an unbelievable challenge and yet
I had a three-person studio the first
person I brought to the collaboration my
team was none other than the
International Engine for engineering
firm Olivera who are collaborators on
the Sydney Opera House the Hong Kong
Bank Lloyd's of London Pompidou etc etc
I knew they needed to be on my team
because my aspirations were large there
were 26 people it turned out coming to
fight for this project but it was my
town does gonna be my project I had done
my first culture war back in the 70s and
I've been training all my life to do a
building like this I formed an
association was a well-respected firm in
the community WL and the three of us
went in the room and were interviewed
Arab has a strong tradition from mr.
Eric himself of being willing to work
with young people young at this point
being early 40s and I just come back
from an Rome Academy of experience and
antoine predock your speaker last year
took second bridesmaid at this one and
that was a great experience for good
friends and so it's funny how two guys
from them the Southwest have come to the
middle of Ohio to talk to the building
community here simple box Ralph Edwards
the program again to listening
twenty-eight citizen meetings 650 page
document written with the librarians
Ralph wanted a big warehouse we had a
very very tight budget of less than a
hundred dollars a foot we were able to
put forward this building with an
increase in staff well it was more than
double in size the original library of
only 10% because the ordering of this
plan so a tilt up precast concrete plan
one crystal Canyon in the center with
one grand staircase and three high-speed
elevators these forms that are the
extension on either side of the box are
the saddlebags of service at the four
corners are the emergency exit stairs or
fire escapes mechanicals rise in the
saddlebags restrooms live their IT and
telecommunication they embrace the
building given sculptural form and as
well providing the entire
lateral bracing system for of this
building which is bigger than a football
field because we wanted to be totally
flexible for the future so here we have
the building during construction where
the steel saddlebags were erected the
big bowstring trust at the top will tie
in to a roof diagram you'll see in a
minute and a walking crane laid up the
panels and the construction of precast
this was the sketch that it moved from
being a well engineered well programmed
building to a metaphorical Mesa it was a
piece of landscape art it was not of any
style that you'd ever seen it was clad
to be clad in copper again it was about
the abstraction of the landscape of the
West we don't talk about buildings and
Phoenix we talk about Camelback and
South Mountain and superstitions talk
about Monument Valley we talk about the
horizon and not the built environment so
this building with my heritage of
sculpture was forming that conversation
it's on the main street of the city
again copper clad curving abstract forms
almost scale as you can't tell if this
is an eight story building or a two
story building again it's a level about
abstraction a Mesa cut with a stainless
steel canyon announcing the entrance
ways on the Main Street of the city and
the primary used entry off the parking
gardens to the east vertical shade sails
on the north horizontal louvers on the
south again the metaphor of the
landscape a building that was pre lead
and is now being he be qualified to
platinum status in the LEED rating
program it was completed five years
before we knew that acronym it was an
epithet was part of those first three
hundred and fifteen or seventeen
buildings as well as an attitude that
prevailed again with the budget you have
to be invention just like the broken
block these strong backs here are at the
pre casting yard where are 8 foot 2 by
40 foot long channels are being
Cass and as we looked at the potential
of what we might do with a surface we
knew we could find beautiful entrance
with aggregates from Colorado we could
place precise form lines to be very
distinctive and yet we didn't have the
money for any of that so the mere
shunting of the concrete with a 2x6
screeding at once for consolidation
coming back and screeding it a second
time with the solution being Ralph
riffle and then asking the gentlemen to
push down into the concrete and pull
straight up suction drawing it into this
rib became the finish this is jazz not
classical architecture this is about the
randomness that we can afford and we
were desiring because we wanted this to
be a a metaphor of a walk in the Grand
Canyon not some classical or God from
another place in time as we looked at
what would make those copper sides to
our building the first impulse was that
gee whiz you're the big leak now you've
got this big commission so why don't you
call which I did in st. Louis the people
had done the skin for the Hong Kong
Shanghai bank talking them about two
football fields and scale of copper
which was basically where I was after
they got all excited cover made the
mistake the next day and calling their
first reacted to cost of cording well
over $100 a square foot that was a day
when an 16 ounce square foot of copper
one pound if you will was selling for
about two dollars and 80 cents on the on
the market that was a pretty big Delta
for the affectation of an architect that
wanted to do a copper skin I don't like
being insulted like that so normally I
will talk to anybody but that phone got
hung up quickly what I did remember was
in 1970 probably seven right after I'd
come back to the Arizona after having
been there in the 60s with Paulus
laureate at Kosambi the first studio not
Arcosanti I remember these beautiful
grain elevators commented the landscaped
of Ohio and America manufactured by
Balin manufacturer
outside of Lincoln Nebraska they were
curved I wanted curves they were very
efficient almost as a more efficient
than the ease dome if you will in
the principle of every rib is a
structural intention I asked them
knowing full well the answer if they'd
ever run copper no they had not why
would you make an elevator out of copper
make no sense at all
we sent samples because they said yes to
the interest we sent sheets to their
manufacturing facility here at this
point sampling is being done in the
latest humanik design phase of this
project early DD using it these rolling
mills to test the principle for a
mock-up that was destructively tested in
florida to win for our rain screen the
big key was that rather than the to
three foot wide tradition that had
become the norm of American copper coils
we had to find a 4-foot wide coil to
accommodate rollers that were designed
for rolling 4-foot coils of steel and so
in the copper state thinking full well
and ideally that we would have a copper
clad building of Arizona copper we have
copper from South America and Eastern
Europe brought on boats to the st.
Lawrence Seaway to Chicago where the
order was broken apart for some to be
perforated in South Chicago some to be
shipped to Cleveland where the fruit off
trunk company pressed a fruit search
profile for the base on top of our
building other ship to Lincoln Nebraska
all coming together in the desert to
form the clap cloudy for our library
again this abstraction the price of this
copper skin for the ages was $1 more a
square foot approximately 17 36 or
whatever then drivers stuck up but again
there was a passion in this building
there's a passion and everything we do
in life that was beyond anybody just
simply saying no or it's too expensive
for you can't do it this is the south
exposure these are operable louvers
again when we started the negotiation
there was a manual
or sub consultants in Oklahoma and one
in Florida by the time it was bid they
had both one had gone under and one had
been bought by a German company these
are German loafers they operate on
computer software programmed out to the
Year 2040 they are totally closed
they're the South exposure the most
critical at the first day of winter on
the solar noon small little edges
half-inch wide of light coming in but
they tracked the Sun at this latitude in
this position to allow the building to
be a beacon a diagram visible from the
main street of the city and yet
sensitive to the climate were in on the
north side because of the latitude we're
in we do get Sun on the north side of
the building this photograph at dawn by
Tim Hursley in the middle of summer
shows you how for about three hours in
the morning in the afternoon Sun will
rake across this facade even though the
building was extended to provide shading
this was a critical issue these fixed
shade sails are made up of sailboat
Hardware not architectural Hardware the
Ferrari cloth is a Teflon coated acrylic
from Paris France in this case shipped
to Boston trunk to a sail maker for
sailboats outside of Portland truck to
Arizona where the install was one of
those legacies of American ingenuity the
rental truck when it opened had a wicker
basket from a hot-air balloon it had a
large 3-inch diameter diameter rope from
the ardor of Portland Maine it had all
the hardware for our sails and following
the truck with three guys in it was a
1971 cougar fairly rusted out from the
Northeast that was a support vehicle one
day as the sails are being erected on
the North facade in the spring of 1995
Wendell Burnett my associate in the
studio at the time very involved in the
project was up in the great reading room
here on his phone lamenting and hoping
that OSHA would not see the site for a
few days because what was happening
before his eyes was that over this beam
at the top of this window wall here a
very large steel beam is part of the web
system the big rope had been thrown
across the Rope came down to the ground
here and the wicker basket was tied on
to the rope
two men entered the basket along with
two complete riggings for our two fair
pair of sails and the other end of the
rope obviously you know what happened to
it it was five on the bumper of the 1970
which proceeded to drive through the
north edge of the parking lot one block
away and Miletus at the brake on the
emergency brake of the clutch well the
gentleman started to make the fitting up
here moving back through the five floors
the building the attachment points
during the course of four days three and
a half days all twenty-eight sales were
in place ocean never showed up no foul
no injury no death it was a wonderful
success story but again high tech meets
Yankee ingenuity again scale proportion
in this case we have the archeology of
Chaco Canyon and funky and great Indian
ruins coming to inform the edge
condition between the main street of the
city and because of traffic we could
have a symbolic front door that will
soon be tied to light rail transit but
by by metered count right now eight
percent of the unbelievable attendance
of this building enter through the
formal facade and the other ninety five
through the similar symmetrical
configuration on the east side of the
building so here's the canyon here's the
high-speed elevators called the crystal
canyon because two floors aren't totally
glazed because of smoke requirements for
an atrium building fastest elevators in
town and sexiest that bath rising from a
black reflecting pool and a Noguchi
glass Lantern rising on the other side
containing the grand staircase simple
building a diagram into the great room
again totally a celebration of light as
all buildings are because light is the
probably the most defining thing of any
place we inhabit the planet again a
reference point
Larousse 1861 one of the great great
libraries of the world and before we
even put pencil to paper we stood in
this base in Paris
where we even had a contract with the
city because it was a collaborative
bonding period Wendell and Karl and even
50 wal and three of us went to Europe
room
excuse me ten days because I wanted to
set the bar for all of us to say this is
how far we will reach it we stood under
these wrought iron dome's with their
skylights looking back at the technology
of the book stack a little green reading
lights here I knew where we would go and
this is a building that maybe could have
existed without this but maybe it could
not have I don't know so the room was
built it could have been clearspan but
the grid of the building is expressed
through it because that's about scale
humanity again as an aircraft hangar
where you want to discover the wonders
of a book in the top reading room of the
Central Library we have the entire
nonfiction collection and biography a
simple left or right decision anywhere
in the room community reading tables 320
people at those tables along with a few
individuals make this a room at the top
of the Mesa in a city where our rooms of
the top are occupied by corporate heads
and lawyers and bankers and citizens
separate never gets to see his city from
the top of a building we thought that
was wrong that's quite a different thing
to see a city from the top of a mountain
than it is at a beautiful window and
created this reading room and the edges
float on white and this roof system is
all about allowing that to happen and
the charge I gave to the young my dish
ler from I think from Columbus actually
originally my Kichler was our engineer
with Arabs I said Michael I would like
to detach the roof of this one acre room
from the walls and let there be six inch
skylights of the edge because I know the
magic of that I would like you to create
a skylight over every column so the roof
wouldn't appeared to float and he
created this combination of tensegrities
buckminster fuller's principles and this
diagonal grid of cables and tensegrities
go out through the second disease bridge
trusses at the top of the saddlebags the
columns taper because the load of the
roof is you know merely about
forty pounds the roof of the floor is
150 so the columns tapered to celebrate
that and excuse me and in this room as
you come the rough floats on light each
day as the this is the east wall of the
room behind us over here on this wall
over here on the west and solar noon
through this little slot of white or not
along this offset at the wall light
starts to come down the wall slowly like
watching water boil in a teapot slowly
it comes down the wall starting about
five after 12 and typically in Arizona
at about 12:30 that solar noon as our
location of the time zone it will come
down slowly and kiss the floor as a
kisses the floor here it starts to climb
up the wall on this side and at a
perfect moment the brook floats totally
on white so this is about two and a half
minutes past solar noon because it's
moving into shadow the east wall being
shadow in the afternoon and have a
different quality of light so there are
floats every day probably 318 days a
year in the beautiful Sun of Arizona and
then the column capitals here are these
pools of blue translucent white aren't
the photograph here buts the color of
glacial ice there's a little clear oculi
here just off-center and approximately
thousand to 2,000 people have come into
that room the last twelve years because
we celebrate not our place in Phoenix or
the desert or Arizona or America our
place in the universe because on solar
noon on the Solstice the first day of
summer in the desert something to
celebrate it's coming be ready for it
guys it's a dry heat the light comes
through that little aperture and lights
the tip of the candle and as you stand
in the room every column in the room is
like a birthday cake and there's a
danger of light at the tip of every
column again architecture has the power
of memory
and placemaking moving fast forward 12
years last November in the town of
Hercules California this is our latest
library to be finished
it's a twenty-one thousand square foot
library for the town of Hercules where
they used to make dynamite and again
it's a place in the California Sun and
it's a skin made of brick in deference
to the other important building in the
city which was the only significant
building all through the 20th century
was the headquarters administration
building of the Hercules dynamite
company so bricks seemed to be an
appropriate material and yet brick and
an earthquake force no it doesn't make a
lot of sense and as we created our
building we have Willie here and Willie
I was up on the scaffold with him at the
upper core of the building this day and
we were laying our in place
sample on the building after we had done
the initial backups so we have four
different colors we have different sizes
we have two different widths and again
Willie had never laid a wall like this
and I'm up on the scaffold with him
laying the first patterns and giving him
the rules of the road the rules and
aren't rules but really are rules and it
preceded that this one gentleman Willie
that is his name put every tile on this
building personally one man in six weeks
he had five odd men and people helping
him and supporting him he didn't grout
all those tile but he placed every tile
on the building and again with this one
little patch of a hundred square feet on
a hot afternoon in California in June
that was all that was necessary no other
drawings at it and again it's about no
notches it's about floating your
vertical joints so you never have to not
you can't you won't be allowed to not to
break and the whole energy of this
building comes together so building in a
very interesting community because it is
the true quilt of America this is the
most diverse commitment community of
harmony I've ever experienced in my
sixty years of life we have a black
mayor we have a Phil
Pino of ice fair we have a Latino we
have some whites we have age
differentials and they all like each
other there is a synergy in this little
town of about 35,000 people that you
could not imagine they were so due to
doubt for the black tie that they put
the Phoenix Art Museum to shame in a
city that's the fifth largest in America
okay it was in the celebration so this
is opening day here's the balloons it
because of that polychrome nature that's
part of what my color choices the brick
was all about eating that together but
it was also about the golden grass of
the hills of California and all the
variegated tile roofs of the city but
the outside talks to the California
emissions of kelp history and because of
the diversity of Eastern culture meaning
Western culture this community we have
this elliptical sky guard in the center
that is Eastern Zen if you will it's the
quiet of that place
so here we are at the library at opening
day and here is the inside of that pile
building and here is the quiet garden a
retreat of quietness Dada my garden at
the roof of a certain architecture
school we know that's filled with sumac
rather than Magnolia that gives you a
place that we understand your place and
I sat on the rooftop of the architecture
building in the courtyard through two
battery charges of my cell phone today
doing business in the climate we have
enjoying myself because there was no
when there was a little bit of Sun this
morning and again the magic of memory in
place but this is our garden and
Hercules and separates the children from
the adults but not really there's this
fluidity around and again the large
space and the fretted glass here and
again there's a proclivity and maybe a
sympathy you can maybe see
pattern developing here between my
friendship for mac and merrill and our
interest in random patterning etc this
is a double fretted pain which is 80%
opaque it has to fruit layers on a third
pane glass it faces Southwest in
California that's where the Sun sets
that's where it's oddest that's why it's
basically an opaque wall being in
Hercules and with Greek mythology at our
finger we also have the fires of
Hercules burning in the hearth visible
from the freeway the rolling hills of
California the double threat interior
inside face interior pane
translucent exterior face into your face
exterior pane opaque random stencil
pattern hand cut digitally represented
and shifted made in Singapore ship to a
construction site built by Turner
Construction who has a very strong
presence in Columbus but it's a very
small world and again people I sort of
know but don't know I got there that
morning the library was closed so we
asked the superintendent and the city
facilities person if his family might
come by later so this is the
superintendent's wife who is with Turner
construction because they built the
building these are all the librarians
who happened to be having a meeting on
the day of the shoot when the building
was closed but this is what buildings
are about this is what community is
about and here's our little library
here's our little story column over on
the side the children's area and again
value engineering raises its head but
I'm actually quite happy that this wall
went white and here you move through the
pattern of things the story cone a
little homage to that great great
American architect in San Francisco Bay
region Barnard may back of Christian
Science church fame and tells the fine
arts and Barnard is smiling because of
our wonderful cone here they got the
musician magician to come for the
opening they hadn't even realized they
would wear a blue robe with a conical
cap for the event accidents just happen
simple
industrials think plywood with a
transparent stain of blue
get up in the cone and how many kids
first memories of a library will be
forever great ones because their first
day coming to the library and having to
book read to them in the snow a cone of
particulars California but again as
we're moving through this journey across
America we go to Reno Nevada the biggest
little city in the world we discover the
Black Rock Desert on the edge of that
city and that Black Rock becomes the
interent inspiration for the Nevada
Museum of Art in Reno this was completed
about three years ago and is a total
Museum it's the only one of its kind in
here in Nevada and as crew with a very
interesting focus on collection the
altered landscape collection and
photography because very hard for a
young museum to really gain connection
and collection and it's now the
centerpiece of the cultural community of
an entire region is covered in black
zinc it is a ventilated wall here where
this acts as a sunscreen because this is
the West the wall ventilates itself even
though it's black it went to be
mysterious again these are the process
drawings I believe in program I believe
in these little squares that I play like
a Ouija board trying to make the puzzle
work because again it's that flow of
spaces it said in a relatedness that
transfers very quickly to sketch I've
never inhibited by these load of squares
- you don't limit me in any possibility
of what a building might come but from
this rigor that this grows this is a
first sketch of elevations and this is a
high-tech digital model to show you my
modeling prowess this was a model being
prepared and one of the junctures in the
evolution of design for presentation the
next day to the director and curator
president the museum and as I was
preparing my quick little cardboard
study model wasn't quite right I
suddenly made a photograph of it I think
this might have been pre digital even so
we ran to the one hour for no place at
Walgreens got the phone
back I then proceeded to blow it up on
the black-and-white Xerox machine
because we didn't own a color one then I
proceeded to use whiteout which is a
very special high-tech tool to be used
with digital printouts and my markers
and my highlighter here and this became
the day that the building went from
being vertical to leaning to warping the
twisting and this is the process of
making architecture I know what to do
with digital I will never do it myself
I know email was new to me two years ago
I now do emailing I have 20 almost
30,000 photos at my iPhoto gallery so I
love digital photography and I know what
to do sitting next to any of the 25
people in my studio I respect it and yet
I could think faster than that machine
and we all have to remember and I see
students here that machine that you guys
probably have great prowess and driving
already is just the machine that's not a
brain ok
that is not the most important tool that
you will learn to use in your life most
important tool is a little bit older
called a wastebasket and you knew how to
use the wastebasket your chances are you
will become a much better architect than
anything you will ever learn to do with
your computer because again editing
reduction you can never throw away a
great idea but you always have to try
and you have to have the regular and
intensity to use that wastebasket our
environment would be 95 percent better
not if we had more computers but we have
more people that knew how to use their
wastebasket there's an awful lot of when
we drive through the streets of Phoenix
and and Columbus that should have never
been
the homage to Reno and the bright lights
of Main Street with our glowing resin
column here where the building floats on
energy again you can see a building in
my philosophy at our museums is that yes
this idea of sculptural form very
important this idea of these objects in
the landscape we see such great examples
that's I'm privileged to be working in
this world but once you cross that
threshold from that form and enter the
building it must be about the memory of
the art and not the architecture we got
lucky here this borrowed life in the
developer building just to our our East
it's windows picking up the afternoon
Sun dance across the parking lot
providing this wonderful art
installation everybody's you know my
staff said you guys say we knew that but
I knew that when we took down the
scaffold and the building was black and
I saw that the lights climbing up the
first time I was there it was oh my god
next time I'll do it because I think
about that environmental issue which I
did not think about when this was
designed to clapboard buildings just
talking to each other about context it's
about place and again the quiet of this
space yeah all that energy is then
reduced a place to be the place to
gather small town you don't know if you
always get 200 people for the lecture
because so the poly drumming here always
looks like it's half full and the
gallery is the borrowed light from 70
feet away through five layers of glass
allowing this corridor to be a gallery
it's about art it's a little art space
design just for the series here seven
paintings called exploding house the
contemporary gallery the changing
exhibits of the main gallery here and
you can see the diversity of the space
and it's such a thrill to go there I
mean it just I had two other
Commission's out in the city so I get to
go
there were a few months and it's a joy
to see how these buildings are curated
and used the reaction of the public the
Thursday night evenings I mean this is
what we do architecture for two people
people and placemaking and again as I
came to Reno for the first time and this
was a little design competition and
became a competition of two people and I
was the guy that broke the rule I tore
down the building was supposed to be
saved to be remodeled because I got my
butt kicked
a couple months earlier and another
competition where I played by the rules
and I think I kind of figure this out
this way I'm gonna do this I'm gonna do
what's right not what's the rule say as
though he designed this building and we
came to town for the first time there
was an old hotel from the 1920s on the
river Truckee River and Reno is about to
be demolished ripped down there's an old
hotel they had a glass room on the top
but I asked what's that all about
well that was the main hotel and the top
of it was the gaming room because back
in the old days was about now where they
put you in a black box and they don't
want you to know if it's day or night or
summer winter right they just want the
end to gamble expanded drinking smoking
party and do whatever you're doing a gal
cusine all right but back then it had
this other preference so here was a
totally four sided glass but glazed room
almost a 1920s on the top of this hotel
they say that was the gaming room and
everybody could look at the whole valley
that was ripped down for months after I
came to town so this museum has a
sculpture garden open to the sky on the
top and as you look at the distance you
know why the building is black and why
the building is shaped as it is and
there have been weddings here and
parties here and our presentations here
and again it's a different kind of
living room for the City of Reno so a
few things I want to show you
we've got downtown Scottsdale I did a
little Museum from a five flex theater
right about over here this is downtown
Scottsdale Arizona in the West most
western town this is a 1923 tile of
rough school there's now the Scottsdale
artists school this is a public art
intervention
with Vito achacha of a bus station and
this is an empty lot and the developer
took me to that empty lot a few years
ago and this is what we saw a little lot
wondering if there was any reason for
investment on this property in the
center of this town and what we're
seeing in all of our cities which I'm
very excited about is the idea that
we're starting to make neighborhoods
again we're doing multifamily we're
breaking down this barrier of gee-whiz
who is my neighbor who is if can we live
in in groups and I had the privilege of
really getting involved in that kind of
work so I stood on this lawn they said
somebody thinks they can maybe get three
what can you find well I found with all
the zoning and restrictions it was a
downtown overlay of live work we could
get five even though a lot like this in
San Diego and their rules would allow me
21 units some cities are more
progressive than other cities okay
they've learned a little bit more but we
got five and that was good to make a
profit as I turned around in this lot I
saw that view from that lot I said oh my
god I mean that's Camelback Mountain
that's the the money shot in town and
what we're looking at is because of the
sawtooth patterning of our little condo
complex each one of us gets from our
living room from our bedroom all
privileged the same view of Camelback
Mountain so he's a little 1,550 square
foot units done in a greed building room
program about sustainability very modest
and scale of the opportunity to work on
the bottom and live within have become
homes for five different individuals I'm
privileged to live in the first unit
that my wife bought before she was my
wife and she got me in the punch list
and the thing that ever happened to me
but again it's about sort of a modesty
that appeals an idea of neighborhood
making a living fence a stabilized
decomposed granite parking lot if you
will Auto Court which is not a heat sink
which is not hardly heat island effect
that is stabilized that is not asked
Walt is not concrete the weathering the
skins the perforated window coverings
here that face due west taken away 70%
the direct Sun on these elevations our
biggest air-conditioning bill which is
our high-end
winter is 135 dollars in the middle of
summer for a month not too bad
this is the little entry garden path on
the side again a good cowboy building
weather precious facade of zinc and the
sides and the rear becoming just like
the old panel one of the cowboy building
rusty corrugated it's the view from the
master suite you can see I wasn't
kidding there is the mountain and this
little corner window becomes almost like
a drill light experience simple geometry
here three level living and this is this
window that is forever amazingness as we
wake up in the morning because it
catches the Sun because of the angle
from the east and does all these we have
six moods when we go to bed we have
three sunrises it's it's quite a
delightful thing and much like a James
Turrell white corner piece it totally is
about things that our private garden on
the third level where we have breakfast
and reading our times on Sunday mornings
but it's indoor outdoor lifestyle it's
about the joy of living in a shared
structure at the front of it when we get
into density we will know we have cities
back this is what the density of
Brooklyn looks like in the desert this
was a building where the same developer
that had done the other one this is
abundantly optimistic green line for the
lady when the green t-shirt I'm sure
she's still here this is what pungently
optimistic green looks like this is near
the University it's on a high intensity
thing we asked for 11 variances to
zoning got all of them they've now all
been incorporated into the zoning
guidelines because the building
represents what the new American city
wants to be developed as with this long
courtyard building at the density of 67
units 90 foot wide by 750 foot long a
lot unbuilt on forever is the density of
Brooklyn or Queens
it isn't about tenements it isn't about
scary high-rise it's about courtyard
living this represents the density of
25,000
per square mile in a city that's hardly
scratching at 2,000 a square mile
we cannot be proud of ourselves in
Phoenix with the density but this is
living in a city this is a project in
Denver Colorado this is the first phase
of taxi here it's an old 15 acre taxi
yard this is the mass where the taxicabs
are called into the car barn here where
the taxis parked it's on the railroad
tracks in the Platte River and the first
bar here is a mixed use of studio and
commercial workspace condo office in the
middle and 47 units of housing on the
top and it's a plan that will eventually
have 600,000 square feet one foot of use
on one square foot of land when it is
completed in the next five years this is
a study of our land scraper this
collaboration between David Baker and
Harry Teague and myself and this is the
building and process with the great
views of the skyline of Denver I'm sorry
I didn't get to add the photos from last
week we're now about three and a half
months from complete it's being clad in
three different patterns of horizontal
whether it's steel these are the condos
up on the top we're doing two customs on
the end here and this is the view from
our two custom units for two different
clients at the end and this is the view
of the Rockies and the view of the
skyline starting to play with some
high-rise considerations this was a
little competition we played for a 42
story condo and W Hotel building and
Phoenix again playing with a wrapped
stainless steel scrim to protect against
the Sun using corbusier's Skip's top
elevators of marseilles to allow people
to have a unit that's through floor
facing east and west so they can rise
with the Morning Sun and have dinner
with a view to the sunset and this is
the view through the skin you can see
the operable shutters here not digitally
controlled but on a simple mechanical
crank and wheel if you will not
something to be controlled by the
maintenance
Department but by your own hand as you
fold open the stainless steel and your
balcony to the view of the horizon ap
penthouse is on the roof rather than one
on an open hill town street it's the
quarter of the sky place second
this is canyons and clouds this is a
collaboration the small world I mean all
of you of age in this room know the
small world theory of growing up and
growing old and gaining hopefully a
little bit of maturity but not losing
your youth this is canyons and clouds
this is the model and the diagram for
the SU arts and business gateway which
is a billion plus dollar project which
we did win the competition I put
together a team by calling my friend
Andy bow with Norman Foster and Stefan
banished and Kristy tonight and the four
of us created this vision of a building
a city of you will a part of a city
that's why I brought the team together
of academic buildings the new business
school the new fine art school 850 units
of housing 200 thousand square feet of
retail 3,000 plus parking spaces
addition to Architecture and the roofs
told the occupiable covered with fabric
clouds and this company marking the
center of the campus at the gateway from
the town to the gown of a campus that
has no front door by coincidence there
was a project at Ohio State recently
completed which the gentlemen in the
audience rigged from Turner Construction
told me this is sort of the OE one on
steroids in Arizona and by coincidence
Roger means from Turner Libyan Columbus
who I met his boss tonight at the
pre-event upstairs is the Cost Estimator
was the Cost Estimator who I met prior
to the interviews at this competition
eras
in June 1st of the year 2003 work
continues on this project it will be a
very interesting redefinition of
urbanism in a hot place and to one last
building and then a comment this is our
desert it is extremely beautiful it is
extremely complex it's called the upper
Sonoran Desert
these are paula brea trees and the joy
of spring those are cactus that is the
edge of the McDowell mountains just to
the east of our city we have an
architecture a place that's appropriate
that's about the traditions that came
from the great tradition of right
discovering it in the 30s with his
wonderful geologic massing of this
Indian ruin of the foundations of
Taliesin West covered by that time a
cloud of red wood and canvas and a
tradition which I hope to speak to and
think my work strives to this is our
site this is a site and this is the
funny way that you'll find your journey
and architecture on the 27th of June
last year I was sitting in my studio and
a client for one Scottsdale which will
soon become a city growing here with
3,000 people called me to see if I put
together a short PowerPoint to show to
the tile income corporation dial isn't
so ankle is in soaps and chemical
adhesives etc from dusseldorf and from
Scottsdale because they and I didn't
even know who they were what I was gonna
be doing could I put together about a 7
to 10 minute little presentation about
architecture of the desert to predict a
presentation to this group walked into
room on the 28th of June last year there
was a group from Dusseldorf there was a
group from Scottsdale I'm in a big room
on a very large conference table there
are three other architects they've been
brought to the table to lead a
conversation about architecture of
potentials
I was leadoff batter about ten images
into my talk I got a wing from a guy
across the table from Germany I knew
something that happened but not one cuz
I not what but I think he was
approximately twenty five minutes later
the other guys didn't get to say
anything I was asked to stay and what
you're about to see is the new 350
thousand square foot
thousand parking spaces underground 100
million dollar new headquarters and
research and design facility for the
diol inkle corporation in America so
that's the way life happens sometimes
the marketing expenses are huge and
other times they're not so eventually
these are first sketches after
programming intensively because this has
been on a fast track to say the least
that was his 28th of June by the 1st of
August we have programmed the building
we are having that workshop that was the
introduction to this nice lecture we are
showing diagrams like this and again the
car drives we have to devise the
underground parking situation the flow
of the city of the future that's not
here we're on the edge of the 101
freeway and Scottsdale Road a premier
desert location and so we have one side
of a building where you travel 75 miles
an hour plus so this is a seven and a
half second elevation and this is a
seven and a half minute elevation so
these are defining the place here's the
complexity in the program again you
think gee it's a digital thing well yes
this was a digital Droid but this is a
1/16 inch foam core model there are 600
there are 800 people they'll read people
on this model there are thousand cars on
this portion of the model because rather
than presenting on a screen what I have
all these Department has all these
people come in from Germany in America
everybody focusing in on their little
red square because we're into
procurement we're into testing so to
show them the bigger idea we presented
the whole design three dimensionally on
a table in a room a combined
presentation between Scottsdale Arizona
in the middle of the night and
Dusseldorf Germany it was midnight there
I did two hour non-stop presentation of
ideas on the 28th of August last year we
are currently as we stand here today
through approvals value engineering
evolution of a scheme through scheme one
and two as we looked at all those
reaching things created a building where
we are digging a hole today ladies and
gentlemen we will have two torrents on
site March people will be taking
occupation of this R&D
facility in June of 2008 and the
headquarters will be done in November of
2008 this is a strange world we operated
but isn't any stranger than life has
always been another soap company the
Larkin company in Buffalo this was a
building torn down strangely and sadly
enough but a building about a company
that cared about its employees just like
dial ankle right at a second shot of the
first II worked on soaps of a skin care
that he worked on wax which was table
care just like dial again two companies
at different junctures and collisions in
American history wanting to build a
place for work a special place for their
employees again the idea of the desert
my German client pandering a little bit
a plane with this Erich Mendelsohn
sketch of a high-velocity seventh and a
half second elevation as I made my
presentation and a green building in the
likes of got there vanish in Germany as
well because we are striving to achieve
LEED Gold this is our building this is
the seven and a half psychic and
elevation against the freeway it was a
crystalline cloud plant played against a
masonry geologic mass here floating in
front of the distant range of the
McDowell mountains these are hand
sketches that were then digitally
chlorides
again using this back and forth puzzle
this is moving in a velocity that I
could never ever have dreamed along
elevation the North elevation that you
walk against the scale shift this is
dial Hinkle this is the canyon of dial
Hinkle with its floating garden growing
from trays of nurtured water and this
latticework between the grand staircase
with the he mt skylight clear to the sky
up here that has three different layers
it's the membrane that for dogged
Emirati
they're wonderful Stadium recently in
Germany and as such that there's three
layers there's one pound of pressure and
it's winter excuse me in summer you will
inflate between layer one and two so
that the layer floats to the top it has
a so screen pattern that provides 80%
shading in the space during the middle
of summer you take out the air pressure
in winter and the light floods in so
it's gonna be a pretty reasonable place
to conduct business and collaboration
and invention this is Phoenix it's the
problem of every American city big or
small whether it be Marion Ohio that we
drove through yesterday
it's the Antichrist of the problem of a
place like Toledo sadly enough and maybe
Columbus to a certain degree but in 1861
and a little dot there that was all that
was Phoenix right there okay there's
seventeen hundred people on a half a
square mile sort of by the time I came
to the valley around 1970 you can see
we're up at five hundred and forty eight
thousand you can see how its sprawled
this is 2004 this is the fifth largest
city in America this is the challenge we
all have in every city in America at the
turn of the century before
air-conditioning we do have out shaded
covered walkways and high ceilings and
ventilation then we got air conditioning
and forgot all the things we once knew
in the 1920s there were 14 light rail
lines in Phoenix Arizona by the end of
World War two I should say by the Korean
War
GM had bought up all 14 and dismantled
them as they had dismantled light rail
in America and now we're spending
billions of dollars a mile to
reconstruct light rail and we can figure
what the cities have become this is the
sprawl of Phoenix and again it is a city
with the specialness being its mountains
and you have cities really require a
skyline and again as we look here
skylines are about markers I show you
that picture and is there anybody in
this room that
say Paris I don't think so
so we go from Paris the guarantee
building by the inventor of the
high-rise in Buffalo New York not very
high but that was where it started then
we do Chrysler soon after was Empire
State Building talk about velocity god
what am i I'm slacker here we're gonna
take it
year and a half to build a four-story
building this building was built ladies
and gentlemen in one year bottom to top
one year of construction in the rest of
the American depression we then look at
a Lieber house right never got it we
talked about a mile high never build
anything higher than 20 storeys in
Bartlesville Oklahoma for prices then we
have decency ground lease it Dominion
we're trying to build the identity of
cities here like literally believe in
that John Hancock the tallest building
in Phoenix done back in the 70s it's
still sort of a benchmark IDs in
Minneapolis Minneapolis is smaller than
Mesa Arizona this hick town that's next
the Phoenix you know they had a more
population invasive than they do in
Minneapolis and Minneapolis is a true
great city Hancock in Boston and again
tall could be green as well as Norman
Foster has shown us in the Commerce Bank
and frankly so this is our little entry
into the game
this is 789 feet tall the width of a
city block in Phoenix downtown Arizona
that's that other small building for the
70s here buts about mixed-use and it's
about green it's about parking
underground and on this plant that's
about townhouse living in the sky it's
about all these green terraces all the
way up to the top it's about the
downtown city market that's so needed
it's about this whole mixed use
environment at the bottom which is near
the new ASU downtown campus this could
be a beacon to start giving our city a
skyline
am I looking for a city like Manhattan
filled with these monsters not at all
I'm interested in the markers that make
the marking of place cities are known by
their skyline and it's just not how tall
it is but in
that is one identifier of a place so
it's skylines and it's the nature of a
street and again as we look at the past
this is the entryway into the great city
of Toledo Spain and again all the clues
of what a great city are exist in this
wonderful portal in these streets of
Toledo this is at the water in San
sebastiÃ¡n Spain and Baus country and
Rafael Mateos wonderful arts and
performing thing Visual Arts Complex at
the river in the sea and how again the
streets become these well clean places
at night and this is the genius of REM
cool house at Casa musica in a porto
portugal on the town square the park if
you will a site that is all about not
one living thing because of its jux with
vision here with this great performance
space occupied by skateboarders and
little kids with their first roller
skates when we saw it right at Christmas
but again understanding the public realm
the maker of cities the maker of ideas I
challenge all of you tonight as you wake
up to sunrise tomorrow to be makers of
city of cities not just architects just
maker of places and objects and put
people's places buildings and
environments that listen buildings that
are balanced by the spaces in between I
challenge you all to make the cities we
will live in that your kids will live in
and your grandkids will live it in the
world we want to have it because we need
this to happen now global warming is
real there is a certain concern that
does exist there it's time for us all to
be responsible leaders the building
industry the design industry and
definitely all of you students because
this is the wonderful world you are
going to make a difference in and you
are going to create and that's what it's
all about
our potential is a wonderful art form
and building is what builds memories so
thank you for having me to Columbus
[Applause]
so if anybody has a question I guess
that's what you were going to offer I'd
be happy to answer them I realized in
these sort of Affairs sometimes it's
hard to raise your hand but I did more
convenient for you I will sit on the
stage with my back to you so I got so
you know now setting up a barrier with
you because one of my best lectures I
ever gave with the most question and QA
at the end was a phone lecture from my
studio in the desert to Ball State
University cuz they had no money to
bring me there I shipped my slides in a
tray FedEx not even in my powerpoint I
said next at 12 o'clock on the Friday
afternoon in my studio the jet lag was
not very big we went through 75 80
images and I had an hour-and-a-half Q&A
with people I could never see the best
Q&A I ever had with a lecture so I could
do this and say is there somebody with a
question just shout it out if that gets
me there and I'm happy to look you in
the eye as well
anybody have a question see you're also
bashful 16 ounces 16 ounces but because
of the profile of the role of the
elevator with every one of those little
cranks almost looking classical like the
flutes on a column it had so much
structural efficiency that we did our
sampling again how do you specify the
faster I don't know we made a good run
at with our engineers and our
sensibilities about tectonics and then
we after we sold it to the mayor and the
console leaned that puppy down on a
trailer we shipped it to Florida they
took those big with machines they do
skin testing with they blew it until
they could write a report and it blew
apart a basically I don't think we added
two more screws over what we thought was
intuitively right
but again in 16-ounce copper not 32 not
64 six
see now it's like paper you know yes sir
this definitely falls with pragmatic
side okay the the synagogue had the
block right when you show some examples
of the creative skins that you did the
typical design-bid-build process right
do you hand a half dozen masonry
contractors drawings that show blocks
off plumb randomly or do you work
earlier with a Mason or you know how
does that good question because again as
I stand here today trying to bring dial
ankle into what we think is a very tight
two hundred and eleven dollar square
foot budget you know twelve years later
you know we're having the same
conversation so how do you do this why
don't you how do you sort of have the
conversation okay one is that you're
thinking about it from the beginning
these things aren't just pipe dreams you
try to do mock-ups so we have makkah
programs involved with our buildings as
I mentioned we did a copper mock-up skin
for that we had mock-ups provided in the
bid for the synagogue but again it was
just eight eight sixteen gray
heavyweight block it wasn't any magic
there and we showed this textural thing
and drawings and specifications as I
indicated but again from our best sense
as professionals we wrote a narrative
and an instruction sheet if you will
that made it an intellectual exercise
not realizing we could not achieve what
we wanted when I did the random board
pattern on the Redell office building
out of wood part of the specs there was
from the first negotiation with the
contractor sort of had the gesture he
could take his board feet off and get
going he knew something would be a
little bit different but it was just
bored back after all right and so what
happened there was when we were finally
ready to skip the building after the
Tyvek sod and the basic rain screen is
in place one of my trips I was at the
job and we turned on NPR was a good
classical music I spent three hours with
the carpenters laying up the first 20
feet 24 feet of wall they other nail
gods that we put a board here
we did this one that one tonight they
get into the zone and you know how do
you pick from these six different widths
of war and etc and then later in that
day I walked around the entire building
where this effect was happening at the
lower base of the building and I had a
big sharpie marker pen with a big fat
guys and I marked on all the tie back
everywhere where I wanted the change ups
to happen higher went away and I came
back months later here were all my
boards after that one visit and now we
could digitally you know get feedback
every week or whatever because when
Willie and I spent the time up on the
scaffold I had digital images two weeks
later when he had accomplished the next
big rod when he wasn't ready to do what
he just wanted to figure out what it was
and so I got two sets of digital photos
in about three weeks from Willie and
from the superintendent and Willie was
just fine I saw him a couple other times
during the things he smiled he was very
proud very very proud story I didn't
tell you about the Mason - on the
synagogue it's a good one so we got all
this whining because all these guys that
are basically retiring from the job
right couldn't deal with ten : okay well
you're later in Arizona we have the
masonry guild which you probably have
here in Ohio as well and the bases give
themselves awards as well as architects
and owners right and so we have the
annual banquet of the mace reveal and we
sat at the table with the rabbi and the
masonry contractor and the architect he
was still sort of whining at belly
aching but he was one proud dude as he
went up to get his first gold trowel he
never got one of those his life didn't
quite understand why he was getting it
fully but he was one very proud man it's
about that sort of evolution you know
and again we're working uphill I know
I'm speaking to some contractors and
subcontractors here in the audience you
know we as architects owe you the
responsibility of being open minded and
talking to you and respecting you you
own us the respect of collaborating with
us to make these things happen not to
make us the fool because we're I'm not
the architect that comes to the job and
say I drew it you will build it
call me when it's there and it's not
right you'll take it down and do it
again you know that's not the dialogue I
mean the dialogue is
respect and again for my sculptors
background I owe a lot it was mentioned
yes I did pound nails yes I did will
will girls of concrete and salaries so I
have a good sense about what tools are
about but I don't have any sort of
confusion or my ability to be a
craftsman or my ability to know the best
way to do things and that's why I have
matt Gebo on the brake press and the
welder that's why I have you know Ed
Miller that's why I have all these
people I can talk to I know how to say
thank you I know how to say that was a
great job and I don't have to say gee
whiz I can even get a better effect but
I also expect from you mister
subcontractor in contract the respect of
being not that every time something's
different you're not file a change order
because sometimes those different ideas
that we all collaborate to make our
deductions but we moved into a very
legitimate junus world a world where
with this GMP that we've got a guarantee
immediately that once we cross that line
and the first thing you never want to do
young architects here okay and older
architects is you never want to be so
naive to think you're doing any good for
yourself or anybody to ask the
subcontractor or the estimator for the
general how much the window wall is
going to cost a week and a half before
he's really gonna give you the number
because he's never going to tell you
alone he doesn't want to be embarrassed
when it's high and whenever he tells you
sets a new margin for a benchmark that
you'd never get under so just be patient
and wait till it all comes together and
then engage the dialogue so right now
with our Freda class scenario we
basically are two million dollars over
as of last week we're now zoning down to
where we're probably very close to
reality you know we're working with
Access Group as a skin consultants we're
working with glazing contractors you
know from all the documentation we are
doing unit takeoffs the likes of which
the estimated committee has never seen
we have color key documents that are far
more important than any digital reality
renderings will
that building that showed every piece of
glass and every pattern because
basically we have to fret patterns we
have a standard aluminum start a corner
or Vista wall window wall with caps that
just clip on to the building everything
you know there's nothing on standard
about the Lybian the typewritten 150,000
for window that's the standard system
you mean oh I read it wrong I didn't see
it I didn't so it's about the continual
conversation but it's about having the
respect for each other to make things
happen is it easy
no there's a challenging yes but somehow
I'm not going away and again once I feel
there is an equity here and we learn and
we grow and we know what the things are
and so I have a client that can walk in
the room two days after the first shock
of two million plus totally comfortable
with themselves not losing sleep because
they understood what's happened in the
last 48 hours what are you doing mr.
architect because always there's a
designer's problem right we're the guys
that make the problems not about the guy
that's good building he wants it to go
off he's got a deadline he knows how
fast the train is going we've already
committed a hole in the ground you know
they're gonna build it so we're in a
totally a disadvantage it but that's
sort of part of this journey of making
things an architect has to be a builder
and maker and I'm very excited about
this program that Rob has in the
university with you know the building
exchange now we're 25 to 35 with the
architecture students actually work in
with the tradesmen of your industry
that's good stuff because again and
there's a third of them understood to
tell our women age here which is even
better stuff because you know my student
studio always runs better when there's
the balance of male female because
that's the world we live in and it's
this whole diversity I mean them staff
that I'm building around me of 40 equals
about the support to do these things and
it's from a technical person of it and
not just the pretty pictures it can
associate yes but it's about having this
ability to embrace the rigor of
tectonics and materials and making than
it takes
to make these dreams it's easy to draw
them and think about there's no real joy
and looking at drawings on a wall to
join and walking and building like it's
over here on the campus that's magic
they think yes sir
that process I think what happens is
that the Miss nomer often happens that
architects we have a lot to live down
okay we have from the literature of the
Hard Rock's the realities of every
strong-willed architect that every
superintendent or every clients heard of
right and there's this expectation I had
early clients and said will you know I
know you've done a bunch we like what
you do but we're going to get the most
for every dollar we're paying for you
because we don't have you know a lot of
specific needs right and so we're not
going to impose those we want to see you
best from him right and I had the wisdom
RA at that point my wife to politely
called him liars and they said what do
you mean where were those kind of people
were open we're an electoral were
creative we're gonna be your best client
so the best client that I have is the
client that will tell me everything and
more because those aren't limits those
are opportunities to truly identify what
it's about and no client has ever told
me what their building will look like
and yet I always create buildings that
are exactly what their dream was how
does that happen
it happens because I sincerely let all
those things come to the fore realising
fully as a mature adult that people can
only voice the idea of being open and
can only honestly say it before they see
anything because as soon as they see the
first thing they instantly have an
opinion they like they don't like
there's also this other unbelievable
reality which really blows me away that
we don't have more business or buildings
of quality and greatness right because
every client comes to you and once what
there's not this form on the AIA
contract that says on article three
point six paragraph seven three where
the blank is on the standard AIA B
whatever one
one or whatever it is right that says on
this project mister or miss architect
you will be expected to present
