thank you so my my goal today is to
outline a few ideas that I have been
playing with in this area of smarts
studies and how is the nature of our
studies as an artifact and also how we
go about designing and planning them as
processes how are they under going very
very fundamental changes due to the
access of technologies in order to do
that I will hopefully go through this
agenda now in in all fairness I very
rarely stick to an agenda so we may get
through half of this and then we may
talk about other issues so feel free to
interrupt me at any time I enjoy getting
questions as we go through the
presentation rather than trying to keep
everything to the end so it's important
that I share with you a little bit about
how did I arrived at this topic because
how I arrived at it plays a quite
critical role in how I see things my
original academic training and
everything proposed from a school of
management where I was focused on
learning how do these large information
technologies transform organizations and
very very specifically how do they
transform organizations in the ability
of the organization to move information
and knowledge for the purposes of high
and innovation so how were individuals
using email how people using intranets
to really drive how did the organization
innovate and as I began to explore a
fair amount of organizing
I realized very quickly that the role of
Technology was not that important you
could have the greatest intranet you
could have the greatest technology you
throw it in the wrong organization and
it wouldn't make a damn difference and
organizations that just went out and
spent a lot of money would never get the
results then a colleague of mine up told
me Kevin why don't you examine the
public sector I said why do I even care
well the public sector on average
depends twice or three times the amount
that the private sector does on
technology think about that for a second
there are how much money the department
of defense spends on technology think
about any other department they spend a
lot of money on technology as you'll see
later on in my slides the public sector
has a hopeless record at getting any
technology project completed on time on
Project and there are a lot of reasons
why so I began playing around with the
role of Technology in the public sector
and then about three years back we saw
this big wave and the wave came in terms
of about three years back you had
unprecedented unprecedented mobile
access and a lord of the application
platforms and a lot of the development
environments was stable enough to
Anchorage everyday citizens to begin to
develop apps and you have platforms and
markets in place where everyday citizens
could take technology and pick on their
own entrepreneurs that wave
to me though the most critical element
of that is how is that going to change
us society how is that going to impact
how we do things and so for the last
about three years I've been focused on
the role of Technology in how does it
enable us to change our governance
process how does it enable us to change
how we plan and how we design our
societies so I have a word up that
challenge gov how many of you have heard
of challenge God one two three four five
so slowly we'll get more if you have an
order challenge challenge.gov going
you're about go online and look up
challenge our God so challenge.gov came
into operation a few years back and
today it's one of the most vibrant crowd
sourcing platforms for federal agencies
to involve everyday citizens the private
sector the NGO space to solve problems
okay through a grant from IBM i was able
to examine the range of competitions
that will run on these platforms talk to
app developers talk to people who hosted
these these challenges and i'll share a
few of those results later on in terms
of information systems and how I see
governance and smarts cities as i know
that early on there are two distinct
ways i operate and fade these things one
is as the artifact okay so we all
interact with things a city a town
campus can be viewed as a noun as a
thing okay and we can decide how we
these things and for about a year I had
the pleasure of having an appointment in
a school of architecture where I had a
lot of colleagues who were interested in
the thing and how does the thing
interact with its environment in today's
world we don't have to depend on others
to create things that have longevity in
US cities prior to the technology
revolution okay most of the things that
were designed was most of them not all
of them most of them originated out of
central plans out of central structures
today the nature of how we design things
and install them in our environments has
changed the process of how we engage the
community in the design process for our
studies is undergoing a lot of change as
well and I'll highlight a few examples
later on the the role of Technology
today one of the most interesting
aspects of it is today we don't have to
guess about the future to a large degree
we do not have to guess as an example
how many of you have played around with
agent based models 12 today right if if
you began playing with agent based
models let's say five years back they
were very very hard to work with today
they are easier to work with five years
back we in the research community
struggle with how to validate them how
to appreciate them so on so forth today
the use of agent-based models and
simulation environment a part of parcel
of most design elements when you think
about planning cities and especially
smart cities so I get
with that background to basically give
you my lengths of how I view these
problems so it's a very very engineering
is driven lens so most of you pretty
much know everything on this slide we
are moving very very radically towards
mega cities as a dominant structure we
have large large cities that are being
constructed being built and most of them
so the last point is probably the most
important one most of our future mega
cities are not in places we know a lot
about we don't know a lot about a lot of
these areas in terms of infrastructures
in terms of policy development in terms
of governance structures and many of
these places are highly unstable as well
so if you look at
if you look at various numbers okay we
are about 7 billion individuals in the
world 1 billion cars and you can just go
online and get all the numbers you need
most dense mega cities and you can see
them they are all getting concentrated
in a few areas okay this is all data if
you were to charge mega cities in 20-25
if you trust predictions this is what
the world would look like this is not my
prediction this is somebody else's but
you notice a few trends you see things
happen
if you look at the literature and the
practice on smart cities about
ninety-nine point nine percent of it is
focused on those large bubbles that I've
talked about or I showed on the map or
the major mega cities of today if you
think about New York London so on and so
forth a lot of the literature is around
that and what I want to do is give you a
vision this is an idea on what I think
magus a smart city needs to have and we
will go through each one in some detail
throughout this presentation but i just
want to throw this up here for a minute
does anybody have anything to add to
this anybody disagree and if he wants to
change something just as with any
outline this is half wrong and half
right yes sir
okay let me go back why well there's a
very easy answer to that and a more
difficult answer the easy answer is the
reproduction rate is very high in India
in China I mean I mean people are
reproducing at a very very high rate
compared to the rest of the world
especially India China is not so the the
other reason that people attribute to
large population growth are high level
of education you know the role of women
in in society I mean there are a number
of reasons that drive population growth
but so I outlined this vision and
basically this vision grew out of a
whole series of meetings with the Lord
of city managers and city planners where
I went to them and ask them when you
hear the word smart city what comes to
mind okay now let me give you an
illustration of why the word smart city
gets interesting this is from IBM so IBM
did a study in 2011 and they try to
calculate the pain of commuter fields in
a given steady so you see mexico city
beijing I Roby Johannesburg so on so
forth and then you have the other cities
on the other side having lived in
Chicago for nine years I'm not sure a 25
is accurate but you know that's what
they think it is but I guess compared to
Joanna's book maybe but this is what IBM
calculated the amount of pain a commuter
feels okay soon I'll get the hang of
this depending on your mindset each of
these interventions would consider or
would be applicable if you thought about
an intervention to make us titties model
in terms of transport London introduced
the congestion charge to change
transport behavior singapore introduced
smart metering and tolling that's
considered a smart city intervention
vienna just started adding more bicycle
lanes and removing callings that's a
smart city intervention and then you
have con francisco's bike coalition
another example so you can take any
issue of a city and the minute you begin
to tease it apart you will find just
about any intervention gets classified
into a smart city thing what's the
problem with that or the problem of
everything
right so drawing lines becomes very very
tricky right on the one hand if you ask
the IBM's and this siemens they would
tell you everything to do with
technology is smart if you talk to
public agencies and local governments to
them as we did our research the minute
deal about the words sustainability
smartness resonates with them if you
talk about young citizens they they
think about information provision as
their dominant variable when they think
about smart so the number of apps to to
any college going student I would
hypothesize that if a city had more apps
you're probably going to get them to
think it's smart so so one of the big
big issues in the literature and
practices you can take just about any
dimension office Teddy's operation and
you can collect the range of examples
from highly technology to economic
incentive issues to infrastructure as in
the case of Vienna to just civic action
and they all fall into this category of
making things smarter okay now because
of the range of those examples my posts
no view which is the answer to the
question of this is you I don't believe
any city is dumb right thus city by its
very existence have to has to have some
level of intelligence smartness so the
question is not
smart cities or not smart cities
question is how do we take existing
things and make them smarter if that's
how you want to frame them or what are
the range of interventions that you can
use in my view technology is one of many
interventions and as I'll show you
through examples technology with our
process interventions are almost always
useless we can have a lot of apps a lot
of platforms lot of senses if the
process and the governance is not
accounted for we just are paying a lot
of money to construct technology so it's
important to appreciate cities
especially if you want to make them
smarter as very very complex ecosystems
amigo so very very basically if you
break down any city and you view it from
a complex ecosystem and there's a
growing literature today on complex
adaptive systems of systems you will see
that if city has few very discerning
elements you have agents you have
objects and you have platforms hopefully
the agents objects and platforms are all
in us in an environment because they
choose to be there everything on the
lower end of that slide in terms of the
features are how these things operate
okay you have local control you have
emergent structures you have each
element being goal-directed on their own
you have environments that are
influenced and the systems that
influence them
and you have a lot of information
exchange that happens in these
environments if you just stripped away
and viewed cities in the abstract you
would see them as these okay given this
view how do our current planning and
design approaches account for them how
do they account for them if we want to
make something smarter we have to
intervene we have to do something to
move it from state a two-state be most
researchers and practitioners if you
bought them in a room and asked them to
describe the elements of us city would
list all of these things if you view
them as that most of our planning and
design approaches unfortunately don't
account for these things can anybody
give me an example of a planning and
design approach that accounts for most
of these this is the Q&A part where I
get to drink water wheel of reductionism
we love it we try to account for
everything in a plan we try to build a
grand plans we try to build mega cities
when we know this is how in reality
things operate
in my research group this these are the
imperatives that we are trying to build
on as we conduct our research and build
solutions one is for every project we
try to embrace complexity rather than
trying to say complexity is an error
term or we don't understand it and so
we'll leave it to us tied or let's have
all these assumptions and then come up
with an answer we try our hardest to
model complexity okay any intervention
that you think about that has some
ability to make us city smarter has to
in some way increase the situational
awareness of the various elements you
are either trying to increase the amount
of information relevant information not
just any information relevant
information one element has about how
their behavior impacts others other ways
you can make things smarter if you adopt
the complex adaptive system view is you
create emerging platforms for
decision-making you have to build cities
where rather than trying to plan every
single thing or our institutions you
must allow for emerging platforms to to
originate and I'll share examples of
these leverage technologies is obviously
important okay i'm not saying technology
is not important but it's more important
that the technologies are plug-and-play
it's more important that the
technologies of plug and play
how many of you have done any reading on
the Dreamliner Boeing's dreamline so if
you think about that project okay it was
a fairly complex undertaking actually
its tail is a complex undertaking is not
yet done and what did they want to do
they they actually wanted to build the
airplane with complete appreciation of
complexity so on the one hand I have to
go to them and say you guys are geniuses
rather than Boeing designing the chairs
or the TV screens or any other element
of the airplane boeing went to the chair
designers and said you know how to make
chairs make the best chair you know how
to make the best screens make the best
screens and boeing assumed one thing
that we all take for granted
plug-and-play meaning all of these
independent things will come together
and Boing would assemble it kind of like
how we build computers and it would fly
as you know there's been a lot of
problems with it but its approach is one
where I recommend anybody who has any
free time read about it because that's
what's going to be required to really
build smartest cities we have to think
about how we enable for plug-and-play to
happen today most cities do not have
opportunities for citizens to plug their
information in readily plug their
devices in plug their ideas in and those
that are making headway in those areas
are struggling with what we do with
those inputs ok so the plug-and-play
aspect becomes very important and lastly
if you really want to appreciate the
whole
call them up and lack of central control
you really need to enable ways for those
living in a city to actually actively
participate in its construction
maintenance implementations building so
if you were to go home and ask yourself
how many times did you actively
participate in the design of your city
how many instances how do you recall not
that many none of most of us are passive
residents we use our home we design our
home we don't care about the next home
right in a complex adaptive system model
you can't do that you design your home
and you design your home so well that
you can zoom all the resources
eventually a home is not going to be
that good they take some time for that
feedback to materialize so how do we
enables citizens sorry to be active
participants is so these are our
imperatives that we are working off of
as we try to conduct research and
projects around smarter cities and
organization so let me give you a few
examples now in the interest of time I
will not be able to get through every
research project because I've chosen a
few examples but I'd be glad to chat
afterwards you can email me I have all
the articles you can read them we can
skype we can do a whole group of things
so I apologize in advance if I don't get
into the nitty gritties
so I already know of Jennifers work
around apps and mobile apps and
everything so we also did a project
while I was out of Virginia Tech we
examined the whole group of apps as well
and most if you see on this end there we
go all of this stuff you will find apps
in just about every aspect of what would
be considered urban management policy or
local government just about everything
ok for example transparency and
corruption let me just give you one
example ok in India in one of the Megas
in one country that as that has one of
the highest growth rates of mega cities
in the future corruption is very very
high so a non-profit created an app it's
called I PAB I paid a bribe to cool app
you should go check it out so basically
if you go into a government office or a
public agency or you deal with any
stable Sylvan and you pay a bribe to get
a particular transaction completed you
can go online and say I went to this
agency I wanted to do this this is how
much the bribe so it serves one you are
reporting it plus two you don't want
other people to pay more than the going
rate so the going rate for this
transaction is hundred rupees and you
have an officer saying well give me 400
you can say to them no look it's hundred
they're going rate is hundred the the
other reason why it's very important is
if you went to the bank withdrew money
right and then you went to do your
transaction and the force and then
accept money you can also report that so
in India a non-profit constructed this
you have apps so for example in
transportation when I was at the
University of Washington a few students
that will join from the information
school and computers x created the one
bus away app okay where they basically
took advantage of GPS data that's on
buses so that you don't have to wait in
the rain it's a very simple prom and
they built an app so you have a whole
collection of apps what we did was we
wanted to see what were they doing and
how were they being built and why most
apps took advantage of either user feeds
meaning like in the I paid a bribe that
was a user feed app you have to input
information in order to get any value
from it or they took advantage of
government data or a combination of the
two most apps had goals that are noted
there as we began to tease away at these
apps we became very curious about one
thing why would a portion develop an app
how many of you have developed apps 12
why did you develop your app was your
motive motivation entertainment there
was another hand somewhere up there that
hand went away
okay motivation entertainment what we
found is basically this beep their role
agencies that gave out little prizes
that got individuals moving so for
example the most notable one is the
competition that was run in DC where
they open up data and they gave our
prizes small small amounts two thousand
five thousand the other ones they were
just civic activists that wanted to
solve a problem and the third one we
found a lot of developers who built the
original app because they thought
they're going to make money they were
going to open a business open everything
else unfortunately for a lot of those
they haven't made money yet okay so we
began this project as our first input
and to try to understand how is the
democratization of Technology how is it
transforming things now a few things we
found that are worth remembering now and
I will build on this one how many of you
have heard of the long tail effect no
the long tail it's very true for apps
what does that mean most apps most apps
have very few users very few usage
there's a long tail effect if you look
at apps in general and especially apps
around urban governance and let's use
that work that basically captures all of
this you always have a long tail number
two the other thing we found and if you
go on my website I have even copied of
or not copy
I have made available a few of our
interview transcripts and then you can
just read them we found a lot of
competition among developers so if I'm
developing an app to solve
transportation and he's developing an
app to solve transportation and he's
developing an app and we might be a
block away we are not talking to each
other as a result as a result most app
developers give up after the first
failure there's no environments right
now that are in place to promote lesson
sharing knowledge sharing around app
development for governance and I'm being
very very specific around governance
okay whereas if you look at other kinds
of app development there are usergroups
there are user Nets there are other
platforms that are promoting exchanges
so if you look at the biomedical
community okay where a lot of the data
is being made available open large-scale
data there are forums for people to
share in this place there's very little
okay so we found a few interesting
things that led us to this one so we so
we looked at what US citizens doing and
then we'll begin to tackle the issue of
how is inputs translating into action
okay how are any of these technologies
actually making a difference and what we
found is you can categorize most apps
and platforms where you have citizens
collaborating to solve urban governance
problems in these four categories okay
so the first one is where you have a
group of locals titas ins coming
together and their share
bring citizen data on an issue ok so in
Massachusetts as an example there's a
group called local I can never say the
name its local AC are a cy and any we
want to try that local oversee local
crazy whatever local a RC c 1 basically
it's a group that just wanted it was 22
citizens that wanted a platform for
people to share ideas wart on them
discuss them and then recommend them to
the local government for implementation
in example number two where you have a
lot of development happening is where
you have citizens that take advantage of
open data so for example in the Bay Area
ok there's an app called crime spotting
it's a nap and a web-based platform
crime sporting basically it was taking
the police feed data to give residents
of Oakland and then later on han
francisco the ability to know crime data
in their locality so if there's an
incident how many incidences statistics
on and so forth the really cool thing
about that platform was and this is an
important thing to remember as we think
about interventions when the app was
forced beginning to be developed the
group had some discussions with the city
government made sure that the data over
was able to be imported everything else
so on so forth the app became so popular
that this
city had more demand on its silvers and
everything else and they decided to cut
off the data feed city decided to say no
no let's cut the data feed that lasted
for about two weeks and then that will
reopen the data feeling why am i sharing
that example most of the literature
around smart cities assumes we can just
do this and it's no cost there are real
resource costs if we want to make steady
smarter when any of these apps start to
be developed any of these platforms
especially if you're relying on
traditional agency resources to the
average citizen they don't think about
the implications they don't think about
the demand and most agencies today are
opening up their data and we will get to
that most of them and we have
interviewed a lot of them haven't
thought about resource implications have
not thought about resource implication
the third one is at and I've thrown this
up there pick up austin is a good
example of the third model you see a lot
of these now propping up where the
government creates the platform and
chitosan share information if you were
to guess what's the big problem with
this one is a big problem
depends on perspective but close close
people have to go there it's actually
people have to go there and they do they
throw out a lot of ideas all of you
decide those ideas are wonderful he's at
Capitol Hill or the city hall or
whatever building and he thinks it's
irrelevant what do what does he do does
he still implement them does he ignore
them does he respond to them and he's
won everybody that provided an idea what
do they want feedback he has to make a
decision do I give feedback do I not
give feedback if I give feedback or kind
of feedback if I give feedback how does
that interfere with the future contract
bid if I give feedback can I enter into
or can I get myself into a lawsuit so as
a result I mean these are serious
serious implications there's a lot these
websites these platforms if you trace
them you will see something early on
Lord of activity a lot of activity why
because it's being talked about in the
news media there the this city may take
out an ad in the local paper you have a
momentum and a lot of titans and there's
a beautiful book in which Clay Shirky
talks about cognitive hopeless a lot of
us want to change want to help something
gentle we get energized and we
contribute contribute contribute and
then the black box
the policy issue here is again
technology very nice but if the city
then give him three other people to
respond you're gonna be in a lot of
trouble because now you've just
aggravated everybody government centric
and state is a nap model is very common
okay a lord of titties from Chicago to
Boston have all tried that where they
make data open available and they
provide little incentives and we'll talk
about why or the critical issues around
those in a minute okay so open data
which is related to the last one a lot
of ladies are opening this up and as
it's written right up there and I have
interviewed state CIOs on this and
steady CIOs how many of them actually
have a plan that's why I call it it's
cool you know it's become very very if
you don't do it now this is where
institutional theory comes in it's it's
quite a nice thing if anybody wants to
write their dissertation on today it's
all about let's just keep up with the
jones people are opening data because
it's fashionable it's fashionable people
may read to you all of the right things
that they claim that open data will do
like transparency accountability promote
innovation promote this promote that
they don't have a plan the flip side of
doing that is wait and see
and right now we have a lot of lot of
data related issues that unfortunately
are just going to get intensified down
your talk about chief data officers one
project we are embarking on right now
how many ladies have a chief data
officer how many cities have achieved it
if you are a major company will you not
have a post and in charge of your data
if you're making it available especially
if you're making it available how many
cities have achieved an officer time
Francisco is trying to get one it's
trying to get on the last year towards
uh I want to say October they try to
release a new open data policy blah blah
blah the reason being without dedicated
resources there's no guarantee data is
protected one most of the data being
made open okay he's being made open
under the assumption there's no
individual harm done to anybody okay
after the gun shooting we saw what
happens with open data where maps were
made there's no security there's there's
a lot of issues then again if you don't
think about them from technology is not
the problem okay so I just want to get
okay so the other things cities are
doing which I'll wrap up for it is is it
doing a lot of challenges and
competitions take a minute to choose any
two coats and just read them and pretty
much make my point and these are
extracted directly from managers that
have ran competitions to make this
cities or towns smarter and they have
open data and given you notice something
there's a huge disconnect in the two
groups huge and these are people who
actually won imagine those that lost
managers have won mental schema when
they're trying to make apps platforms
data every all of these things available
and those are the things up the people
who actually do stuff like this we
already talked about this one so again
there's a lot of policy and governance
issues that go beyond just having cool
technologies in the interest of time
months I'll just rush you through this
one very quickly the key point that I
want to leave you with is technology
without governance and policy if you're
not going to get anything smarter this
is an example of what agencies are
trying to do with technology today and
the numbers speak for themselves over
three billion not done blah blah blah
okay I hate to it end on such depressing
but in the duration of the project see
how many CIOs were changed every year
the government kept coming up write a
report and trust me on this even if you
can't read them it was the same thing
here in your after and we still spend
billions and billions of dollars on
technology bottom line we took open data
and this is very similar to anything if
you just look at technology and smart
you begin with people talking with high
confidence and high sentiment and then
over time you notice the decline and
these were from just analyzing press
releases
doing traditional text mining when these
projects begin people have it's going to
change the wall and I completely believe
it as a project progresses I don't think
it's going to change the world but I
hope it doesn't harm the world and I
don't believe it okay so with this I'll
end I'll just leave this up but
basically bottom line being our take on
Smart City design and planning is
technology is absolutely wonderful but
if you don't account for everything else
around the technology from a complex
systems point of view you're never going
to make any headway in this and there
are a few ways i recommend that we do
this
mm-hmm so right away oh right so I think
these three elements or these three
design considerations need to be
critical rather than thinking of
designing something so probably the best
way to thing about is I call it the
Google way everything is in beta
everything is always in beta right we
have to take that approach we every time
that I speak to people designing stuff
okay they want the end product they they
they want it to be version 1 or version
whereas if you assume everything is
designed as beta and through constant
feedback you'll eventually extend it
make it more flexible I think you have a
better chance is it easy to do
absolutely not but at least what we are
trying to do is we are trying to launch
platform so at ASU we have a platform
and it's done in collaboration with it
Ashok has change makers where it's an
ideation platform and every I guess it's
every four months or so we keep
iterating with the feedback we get and
we're trying to learn and Regina so
rather than saying this is the platform
and then and we are involving our users
in in the next iterations so it's a
different way and especially if you're
talking about smart cities in order to
do that you need citizens to be active
players in the design process rather
than just recipients of it which
requires interventions on the policy
side
you
you
