good evening and welcome my name is
misty Valley and I'm an assistant
professor of architecture and the chair
this semester noting School of
Architecture ballmer lecture series in
tonight second lecture in the series
entitled ee ee has multiple meanings for
it is a double meeting within the
context of this lecture series it
literally describes more of something or
a double dose additional meetings
include having enclosed resembled the
servant who rolls and it has a slit
mischievious tone I think double is
something you are not or an adventurous
implication such as a sub level it is
ambiguous in specific depending on what
comes to mind first this oscillation
between design and the duties is
definitely at play in the work of our
lecturer tonight tonight it is my
pleasure it introduced the artist and
helped a provocative prolific and
influential artists that have been
reviewing new territory and challenging
throughout the work of those lingering
contemplation and has significantly Sun
and impacted the discourse of
Contemporary Art likely many of you in
this room know and well as you observed
on the faculty
since 2001 which is a distinguished
University professor department apart
however as as someone who was relatively
new to this city she it seemed like an
ambassador hosting open open dinners at
her German Village studio foster
cross-disciplinary discussion and
welcome international guests she has a
genuine interest in the delightful
contamination of norm and the distortion
of expectation for all of these reasons
and many more I am pleased to have her
in the lineup here at Milton's connect
for a bit of context for everyone else
in the foreign in a while and has
received a BFA in itself
non-communicative campus and an MFA new
sculpture from the Yale School of Arts
it was diseased many honors including
this art macarthur fellowship united
states are the fellowship
and has been the recipient of the high
school board deal works exhibited
extensively around the world the major
newham installations include the park
avenue armory the forcer foundation for
the article the guggenheim museum
Hirshhorn Museum of Modern Art in
business name only a few fortunately we
can see her work much closer to home as
a public art project is within the
thompson library in the reading room
entitled verse and encourage you all to
visit if you have not already and
including my first encounter is Ann's
work is via this catalog from the show
you michael white cloth in 1997 the
subtle but straightening series of
billowing white curtains and the godly
framed huge beckons that I take a closer
look and the priority placed on
reframing in the engagement of the
spatial realm of aging you to bring it
back and work over us even as it has
developed to include other mediums to
modifying space please help me welcome
tonight and
actually collect I think maybe that
really starts with my first hand which
is a text background and so I grew up
with things in my lap
going under and over thinking about all
the metaphor applause something that
covers thinking about all the material
processes that form the membrane that
most intimately always surround us and I
think that training and textiles which
started really am I ground of your side
I think being read to and maybe being
read to and the liquidity of those
rhythmic processes were always open and
it's only really in retrospect that one
is he
how and how central some of those early
experiences and hampton and so as i have
gone forward from the scale of working
on the moon or working on her lap the
processes of thread and to threats
crossing o'clock Luke with the filament
versus the upper torso up and down all
of those
I was
and I
and actually when i did this interesting
to know and whether that's for oneself
at the maker
and architecture has made both given the
form and give
extend
was and is our opportunity or just the
way I understand it structurally where
and the most attracted to is large so
one of the architectures that I have to
say I should change my life not change
I was invited in I when I was never know
image architecture might change
open without but it was thinking about
the intersection and to think about
and so literally textile like we really
are is cornmeal on the floor and the
wall about there in this large structure
which there is meal that is throwing in
cultivating a culture of mob and so
although few institutions are really
excited about inviting me this project
called the Union actually was
cultivating and raising entomology they
were feeding off the content that was a
person who SAT infected with my mother
and they were
the narrow lender
and so this accident
never met the cultivation I do know that
after this project was over and taking
down that for many many months when the
lights go down and that is hardly i was
interested in
shortly after that really does asked him
to a larger project at museum she also a
university our team of a very different
character at the University of
Washington and I was thrilled by the
invitation because unlike the project at
the Western which was in once a sequence
of galleries and so the experience of it
was like it was a separate room the
thing that the probability and this
invitation was to work building and so
this is the original building and so we
cook about renovation I was able to kind
of go at it
he's really changed
and it was that time through dark very
early afternoon and this became
landscape marks that was what we did was
we literally touched every square inch
of the building which was that textile
pack total part of me and this was all
done so it became landscape of these
marks and then underfoot there were
metal Miller tags and so these are tedx
at our ministries in the forestry
mystery and those were underfoot so when
you walked in you've heard the sound of
your own material you have smelled some
of the hood but importantly or two
people three blind Canaries
and the natural tits
in this room that was filled with just
produced in this project in which we
passed there and I think the
photographer
but what happens
and it was really to be able to hold
that would change my thinking about how
these are just a few of the process
shots one of the things especially in
this really work that you can see
materially is that every gesture
senior
and so in this warehouse which was
stripped down and ready for renovation
interior dividing walls I took that same
blast and it had we installed heating
runs between all the different wooden
floorboards on each level you see here
and that some of the descent of the
material the rumors were also there were
30 Canaries
this is where about
I
and so what we did was making feeds in
which the sheet rock was torn off and
the light was returned to the interior
and then because I had the whole house
we put cable system up that went through
the ceiling and the walls and floor but
nominee and that cable system carried
two white club would never wait and so
they were following a motion
not deployed but there was a sound piece
and there wasn't able that response air
and it was haunted
materiality and building dirt open food
my not only cutting 42 balls but we were
also able to and their install another
wooden floor that was spin and so when
you stepped on it it it was just fast
enough to be a dare
in
I always and
metrical powers to offer each side of
the entrance we're now filled with
natural life but as i visited ieee
I
the resin to a receptive on the history
of violence book written in the furries
about history for three of the century
and the project is
I wanted to do all of the work structure
to be an opening two billion obviously
that was not so I think about that
civilization so we build a glass wall in
front of it and that was a witch
and then inside rather it were really no
object what we did was inserted a auger
system and that turned along around the
perimeter of each other galleries and
it's still intense fuchsia powder that
fell over a bridge insulation of context
so I seen about the relationship
very way after it was registered the
power just a neuron that this was so fun
that it was it didn't get to do in it to
the stick so it was I couldn't put your
hand out like we spent our hands to
plastic microkini that was almost
the color looks perhaps like red we
don't make this location is obviously
for many people to blend that against
query more fuchsia and more artificial
and I was just thinking a lot about then
you
are now
that was the first and this and it had
recently been converted into
so I was and the voice that have been
imported
our recording as we're working on site
and but it came from an ability of
recognizing the scale of this building
and history x and the body during break
and
you can see a patch in the third floor
and so at one point I voiced have been
put into the drain
there were
relationship
and the material
so this is a double storey space at
maximum and in it we installed a 42 or
50 mechanisms that individually proximo
sheets of paper and there is a system
that raises and lowers speaker's voice
on recording to resonate and the paper
spelling make emulated as you walk
through the space you can see that the
pain of all been shifted but it's not in
jail it's actually
because the colors created by the
backward rather than the job depending
on where the relation to it it's it's
away the bones and the sound and the way
me that recognition
the repetition and how to bring that
thinking about the history of the body
thinking about the lawn for collective
experience and the relationship of that
longing in my work and they might be to
textiles that a textile structure
but
was at the back
there was a
this is a
you
world
there's a like the web and these are
guns leaving are making palm shape and
shaped but again i was able to connect
it's a very little but that will be hot
and the typewriter material obviously
passed way
you know I realizing slide
storage
the first
so
and space where with working which
actually house torpedo
there's always
Oh
I
so as I walked 4 12
if
Oh
Oh
I
sideways
its original threshold
coated
you
I dropped out the video I'm sorry that
people interviewed desk part for me is
watching
what
right
from medication
and
three years i think i'm building but it
was another the lessons again
I had and then it was very much tears
and I never borrow it back for the last
evening that we haven't make the whole
project I wanted really to tether them
walking to
so that was our farewell and so for all
the building projects are
I started out
and I did what I always do when I
started prospectus that I walked and
walked in space very weird
reaction
what
the
Oh
the white bar is hell collectively by
and
so
this
I was
when you've got this way
actors and over
but
Jerry
already
far
the kitchen
what song
we
so the title of the event
you
it was spring day
fine
that much of a possible
song in front
so any questions
so did you guys have any questions about
the ringing going to work with what we
did
armory it was really cute yeah
I work with
No
give you is like a family possibly you
can't can't test it full-scale so you
have to build it oh how it works
I think it's probably really interesting
motion and how our bodies
I don't know myself so while I think
this in civility still life comes a lot
from that craft of the ordering
instructional relationships that comes
from understanding law but that there's
like the piece in the barn there's a
wood paper string law old materials
men's electroweak nights and that's
actually said to are intersecting and so
can assure me scientists trying to find
the people they can well being Buddha
and not always but I've been very lucky
to work with I think this
one of the great things about working
party is that I know when I first I
worked with so many years and they
wanted to know exactly what I wanted and
I can't and that it's a big conversation
back and forth it and Margot totally
understand that in fact you know we
mostly talked about all why should we
feel like this in our kids and so I feel
that through that conversation you know
I kind of go more towards like videos
the sound would need a lot more
technical support and it's just so
expensive it's not very funny and so I
think like it's some way
that is trying to also get back like
really the armory is really simple it's
a really simple system and it's old and
so but that's also commits the
architecture is so I'm working another
space where I wanted to try things to
the ceiling and there's no structure to
die to every woman's crawl stop it
there's like I can't do and that that's
been difficult for me and it's like
turning me another way yeah down into
your question
we have a drink first
I
well I each of those lunches
really specifically doing it a different
way but I think it oh I can't really
take that Commissioner Foley my god but
I think that trying to make a
circumstance I show you which we are
aware or inhabiting our bodies in a
particular not in career at play but
that I think that work surrounded by a
lot of Technology and discourses that
actually also and i think that at one
level your actual experience has
and they're not necessarily interested
in changing processes so that hasn't
been easy I also think that this be
incredibly difficult to shift objects
and that one of the things reasons are
really cool
and so you know I just think the
circumstance
yeah yeah what is my relationship to
animals and those projects what I think
that is that's very that's a Fatah but i
have work with the presence of animals
and worksheets words and i think it's
partly i'm also quite interested in this
space that we're recognition might be
possible that language and so in some
ways i wonder is a relationship what is
the mutual witnessing is there such a
thing between you two and what in what
complicated our relationship to all
domestic animals is and you know the
animals that we eat I think those are
completely unresolved religions but I
think that it's more my work doesn't
sell
but I think there's it allegis this kind
of space of desire this basic desire
perhaps to lose one's edge as a species
is always outside
