so I guess we're ready to get going
thank you all for coming out I know it's
Halloween you're like not
trick-or-treating in order to come to
the talk I promise it will be worth it
so let me just get right to it so I'm
super happy to have John and right here
his first trip maybe to Ohio but
definitely took alumnus John John is
kind of great I mean this is another one
of those intros that I could just go on
and on and on I'll try not to John is
the principal of Griffin and Wright
architects based in LA he's also the
vice director at sci-arc and if you kind
of wonder what that job might entail
it's really he's Lester wolf from pulp
fiction like you remember that scene the
wolf comes with doors I'm Lester wolf I
solve problems and in a way John it's a
really good analogy for how arts Winston
wolf on my saying Lester Winston but
that's kind of how John rolls and I
think it's a it's a good analogy for the
way that his architecture works and also
for the way that he operates as an
administrator I'll get to that you know
so John John was born in New Jersey same
town as Bob some'll there's like some
something in the water there he went is
under graduate studies at Syracuse where
he studied with Vernors elecman Seligman
was one of the Texas Rangers with Colin
Rowe at the University of Texas at
Austin and with Sally Minnie he kind of
John was exposed to a kind of tight
detail driven formalism that I think a
lot of his stuck with him after Syracuse
he went to he went to Columbia for
graduate school but was taught mostly by
Angelenos Erik Moss michael Rotondi and
perhaps most importantly thom mayne and
from them I think he picked up maybe a
much looser but still detailed driven
formalism that has stuck with him after
Columbia he moved to Los Angeles and
began to work with Tom and with Tom and
Michael at morphs this is 1988 this was
a time of transition for the firm so not
long after John arrived Michael would
move on from the firm to become the
director at CyArk
not long after John arrived this firm
started to shift towards larger more
complex projects and also started to
shift toward kind of digital
technologies so a lot of shifts going on
in the place and John was very central
to that stuff and so you know more
phasis in the say early to mid 80s was
known for these kind of manically
articulated houses the ones that made
them famous and by the end of the 90s
they were really doing this large much
more measured much more mature
institutional work that would eventually
win Tom the Pritzker Prize and two of
these projects in particular diamond
Ranch High School and the Hupa Bank in
Klagenfurt Austria were John's projects
so he ran these two projects and diamond
ranch in particular
was really the the moment where a lot of
these shifts took place like diamond
ranches where the the office kind of
converted to to using digital process it
was very messy project it was also the
first messy in terms of process not in
terms of in outcome and it was the
subject of the first source book that we
did here at Ohio State and I met John
then around 2000 and Diamond ranch was
under construction John was basically
living in a trailer and diamond bar
figuring out how to get that building
built and if you go back and look at the
source book what you'll find you'll see
a series of dueling sketches you'll see
sketches by Tom main that often are kind
of more gestural done with a big fat
soft pencil and then you'll see sketches
on the facing page by John which were
done with usually pen or a much harder
pencil and they have labels and rooms
worked out and stuff and so again he's
easy John kind of wolf like solving
problems getting the project to work
after that after the Hupa blank hope a
bank and diamond ranch finished up in
2000 john started his own office with
his wife and partner margaret griffin
like many small firms you know they
started off doing small additions to
houses around la they's those got bigger
and more ambitious you'll see some of
those tonight i assume they moved on to
some institutional work in particular
the the st. thomas school and Boys &
Girls Club in Los Angeles both really
fantastic projects and they also did
some just killer competition entries and
installations so there's a great kind of
floating lawn that they installed at
sci-arc years ago kind of cafe on Rails
also for sci-arc proposed to excavate
several hundred thousand cubic yards of
Earth from around the Mack Center in Los
Angeles really kind of visionary
projects and in these projects and in
the projects they're gonna see tonight
there's kind of three things that I
would want you to pay attention to the
first is
Margaret's brilliance I mean it's
absolutely present in these projects
it's all her he's just kind of working
them out but - I want to point out how
well they work I mean that the projects
if you study their night I hear John's
got to show a lot of plans tonight but
they they they work well and what you'll
see in them is maybe shades of what
Colin Rowe used to call lyrical
efficiency like they work but they work
with a kind of groove to them maybe this
is somehow gleaned from Zelig men or
some of the sources but you'll see that
throughout the projects and it's
something that I had called long ago
writing about Los Angeles pragmatic
radicalism like a kind of a Panera a
kind of wolf-like panache it's not just
solving problems with solving them with
a kind of style and the third and final
thing I would point out is how
particularly in the larger later works
that Griffin Enright really transcends
mere problem-solving and they achieve
another quality that had written about a
little bit which which I stole this term
from Vladimir Nabokov and it's called he
called it aesthetic bliss and he
described it as follows he says that
aesthetic bliss is a sense of being
somehow somewhere connected with other
states of being where art curiosity
tenderness kindness ecstasy are the norm
this is there are not many such books he
said there are not many such buildings
either like that most buildings don't
quite get there and I laid this I use
these two terms to talk about a bunch of
LA architecture in an essay a long time
ago and I thought it you know it kind of
made sense but but really for tonight I
think it's simpler and in many ways
probably closer to think about the wolf
yeah he solves problems but the reason
that we love him and we love to watch
Pulp Fiction is because he solves them
with this incredible panache you know
he's he takes these huge risks he's
completely unflappable he never breaks a
sweat he knows exactly what to do at all
times or at least gives the appearance
of knowing exactly what to do at all
times and that kind of careful
calculated totally assured posture is
what I think makes him such a great
Tarantino character and I also think
it's very similar to the process that
makes Griffin and writes such a great
office to pay very careful attention to
so with that and you turn it over to
John please help me give them a big
welcome thanks Todd everybody hear me
okay I have one of those voices that
will absolutely put you to sleep I've
been I've been told that by people that
like you you talk and I just want to
fall asleep I have a low voice so I
apologize to that I hope you're not too
tired
maybe the images will be more
stimulating I want to thank Todd again
you know you you stole Todd from us so I
stole Christy ballet as a part of a
prisoner exchange program and of course
Jeff is always back and forth constantly
I'm gonna read a little bit in the
beginning cuz I just got to get some of
this stuff out and then we're gonna go
through the projects and it's going to
be will just be an hour and but I really
did want to get a few things
so of course all its work and I says my
partner Margaret Griffin if any of you
know her she's really the the everything
I'm just kind of a frontman suit she
often says to me just look pretty sit in
the corner and shut up but every once in
a while I get let out like tonight she's
too busy so so I get to to start the
illusion and I I like you know we the
wolf that character comes up before it's
come up with other people if only the
world was that easy right and what we
love about that character is if you
remember he tells everyone to shut up
and just do what I say and I'll get you
out of here right because they start
well why do I have to take my shirt off
in it and he says yeah this is the rule
otherwise I'm leaving right and I'm not
gonna save your life it would be great
if we were all that powerful and life
work that way in it it's a if that's my
reputation I'll take it what goes on
inside is much busier and full of its
insecurities suffice to say anyway um
let's see here I'll figure out if I can
get this over the last 18 years we
worked on a whole bunch of different
kinds of projects I've been lucky enough
to have a good number built and I'd say
building is important to us and while
all the projects come with their own
particular constraints and limitations
and you can also say that the act of
realizing a project there's even more
always we always believe that working
through these constraints and
manifesting in physical form is crucial
to the practice always has been that's
why I came to LA so I left New York
people were building I was interested in
it since we found at the office eighteen
years ago we've always had at least one
thing under construction which has been
really great and related to that I think
we're known as Todd said to our
attention to
and we definitely take pride in that I
hope that comes through in the work
although I'm not gonna really talk about
that much today it's not gonna talk
about the tectonics or the details
you'll see a lot of built work that I'm
going to show is it in a way you know
when we talk about that kind of thing
it's like it's what every architect
should do it's what we do kind of master
our craft in that way it's a little bit
like maybe grammar you should just have
it and you shouldn't really notice it
but then when it's bad you really can't
stop looking at it like grammar it's
like that so I always appreciate that
that comment but I always feel like
professionally that's kind of what we're
supposed to do we work at all different
scales as Todd mentioned larger projects
furniture exhibitions to keep off the
grass there that was a I remember we
that's an old project but 15 years ago
and I'll never forget it's Jeff's heroes
on the mezzanine and I was with a
another young architect at the time and
I think I just just met you a few years
before and you said I really like your
installation I think I was with my
daughter she was about this big
she ran away I said oh thanks you know
this guy said
to do to hear what just happened and I
said yeah that guy you know Jeff Kipnis
he said he liked him rotten like I said
he doesn't like anything now I didn't
stick around long enough for you oh I
remember you said you really didn't like
the the wood beam and the tectonics
underneath and I said that's what I
worked the longest on anyway I always
remember that so in that I'm gonna show
you ten projects we've done we've done a
bunch of houses and in the in the in the
spirit of that I'm going to show you ten
projects they're all either built or
under construction and one it's like
just starting and so some of the photos
I'll show are kind of construction
photos kind of not high-quality polished
architectural images others more so
depending on the project and they're all
in Los Angeles once in Northern
California then the last ones are a
bunch in China actually they're just
finishing and then you know it's
Halloween and that's why I 2 reasons I
called the lecture The Last House on the
Left one students is Wes Craven's 1972
movie and it's Halloween and that that
seemed appropriate also that you meet a
lot of architects who say I don't do
residential work
I can't do this it's too personal and it
is it's highly personal work it's very
difficult work designing someone's home
and I'm always saying in the office this
is the last house I'm always think this
is the last house and I don't wanna do
any more they're driving us nuts and
then we still keep getting em oh now
really maybe even mostly known for a
residential work and I can't we can't
stop and we just keep getting more
opportunities to do them so I'm not
complaining that we're happy to have
work and to work through it and maybe
this lecture cuz I'm only showing houses
I'm only really going to talk about cut
two or three aspects of this very
specific lecture in that way I'm not
trying to give you a kind of monograph
of what we've done over 18 years it's
just kind of specific in this particular
canon
and before but before I do that I want
to talk about a competition and Todd
mentioned it and this was excuse me I
think 15 years ago and it was a
competition called the vertical garden
competition that Eric Moss and I think
her nan actually was involved in setting
it up the situation was this and it's
kind of part two there was another
architectural competition now this is
the Schindler house famous Schindler
house of 1921 in Los Angeles this is a
plan of it
and Peter Norville was running the max
enter through the Schindler house there
was a new building that was going to go
up next to it just to the south this is
the bottom of this plan it was an
apartment building designed by a local
Los Angeles architect and everybody was
up in arms about this thing you know oh
my god it's gonna ruin the Schindler
house so I got a bunch of architects
with NIMBYism going and it's lurking on
Hurley he's a decent architect guy I
know and they said we need a vertical
garden we need a wall you know a rate
here you know along the south and then
Eric and her not so let's do a
competition and it was us and servo and
a bunch of Sarek faculty and they
invited us and my first reaction was I
don't want to do it I think this is
ridiculous that they're really kind of
calling out Lorcan you know he's just a
guy trying to do work they're gonna do
an apartment building I don't really see
the project here and then we started
talking about it a little bit in the
office and then one thing led to another
I said okay well you know I think we
should give it a shot so here's the
house that's you know again no I'm not
gonna go into the full history of the
house especially they're built it was
based with two families who live
upstairs but what we were interested in
was the present condition of the house
well basically what happened was you
know since 1921 here it is 1921 right
so he's an architect younger guy he's
buying the cheap land which is like
outside of the Hollywood Hills here you
know this now looks like this
today but it was it was basically a
house within open landscape and then
this stuff happened right so zoning
changed and the 45 foot height limit of
apartment buildings came through on
either side and so this was where this
is now an apartment building that Lorcan
did and so this is where they wanted
that that wall so I thought well look
that the house is kind of odd anyway it
doesn't really need a wall or maybe
maybe it needs something else and so in
a way to kind of maybe even comment on
the competition itself and the premise
we had an idea that said well first of
all maybe the house is really like an
object of art in the city in a way it's
been totally subsumed around it no one
really even lives there there's events
in a way one could consider it a kind of
like a piece in a museum that one visits
it's isolated so we came up with the
idea to actually as Todd said excavate
underneath it to fill and create this
kind of wall around which is a double
helix set of ramps of course because
it's me there ad a landings every 30
feet every two foot six one and twelve
slope actually all work and calculated
and then intertwine so the idea being
you can go up the building to a kind of
roof garden and then down and then it'd
be the big big public space below you'd
underpin the entire building with steel
beams beforehand and like a bridge then
excavate underneath so the whole thing
would be kind of propped up it would be
a concrete building homage to the tilt
up
concrete of the original and then we
just began working on it the world's
smallest 3d print model and then you get
an idea of the section so at this point
now we're looking at what concrete can
do that's kind of blending between the
kind of rigidity of the ramps and the
double-helix exposing surfaces kind of
notions of kind of arches of concrete
and then finally the the garden on the
on the roof and then this is the whole
object this is the this is the ground
plane right here and so the weird thing
is we won the competition this is
whatever that means winning so but they
gave it to like always so these guys
these two people I think it was us and
then this is the landscape guy used to
teach it Sark I forget his name
you know yeah was away anyway so they
gave this is it two winners and of
course Peter nervous that said this is
fantastic
what do I need to do to build this and I
suggested raise a hundred million
politics and then he went away so that
was that and then you know some of our
drawings got into the Mac Center in
Vienna in the maket sorry the Mac Vienna
and that was nice but it was we're
really I think for us talks about you
know the changing landscape of Los
Angeles what a house is in Los Angeles
the scale and today I'm going to talk a
little bit about I'm gonna go through
these syrup first so just go this gives
you an idea of what it would be like to
kind of view the house as an object from
the top from the bottom
etc
so anybody see this is from the New York
Times the figure-ground
right it's fantastic I can't I don't
know but yeah I'm fascinated with maps
and and and and maybe I'm implant
fixated I got I'll go on Google Maps and
Street View and visit places and all we
always look at them so this is a
actually from a software company that's
supposedly mapped basically a figure
ground of the entire United States right
of every building so this is not a map
of roads
this is buildings just only buildings I
tried to figure out and maybe someone
can can find this out for me how many
buildings are in the United States
anybody have an idea they estimate that
there's 82 million single-family homes
which i think is the most prominent
number of buildings so so you know when
we when we look at Los Angeles and this
is a figure ground in Los Angeles and
I'm going to show you projects that are
Oh down here in Venice and the hills of
Pasadena there's one right here in Point
Dume there's a few up here so I think
eight of the projects I show will be in
here but I've grouped them into two
different types I mean all right one is
the kind of Villa typology right so we
understand the villa as you know
characterized as having isolation to
other buildings or infrastructure I mean
it's a Latin a derived term it's remote
it's sometimes in the country right
versus what I call it to pick a town
house but I don't like that word so
don't say at all most infill project
where you get houses close together
almost together
my apologies where they're almost a
townhome or a brownstone condition and
Los Angeles is filled with these kind of
things where a townhome would say I
would say almost infill types of a more
direct relationship with front and back
right
and they also create their own problems
I'm going to do a public/private a
sequence and organization whereas the
villa you know has its own problems
doing with open space entry and sequence
and so I'm gonna talk today about those
two types it's like four of the villas
and five of these almost in fills or
townhouses and I'm going to talk about
specific sequences of spaces spatial
relationships that I'd say focus on the
public nature of the house and this
would be of course obvious relationships
between inside and outside but also a
choreographed an intentional celebration
of the circulation of the house and
within the work there's an interest in
the friction and spatial disruptions
that can occur that move at moments of
movement and sequence particularly
through entry and vertical circulation
now you're going to see a lot of that
this reason I'll show you a good number
of plans of the projects and I'll try to
map these areas out with the kind of
note where these points are and then
follow up with three-dimensional kind of
drawings and photographs and I wouldn't
say that we we don't believe that plan
is a generator of course but just for
this lecture it's actually I think
helpful to be really articulate about
particularly the houses how the sequence
of rooms have kind of work and I think
that's peculiar to our work so with that
we're gonna start with the first Villa
type project and this is Point Dume this
is part of California and Los Angeles
that faces south actually so north is up
PCH is up here and this is a Point Dume
with a fairly wealthy enclave of fairly
large properties you know Bob Dylan
lives up here and Barbara Streisand
people like that and our client bought
this piece of property here that you see
this is also a famous surf spot and
cliff down here you can park here
surfers come down great secluded beach
the property is about 500 feet in its
length and about 100
25 feet wide and there was an existing
retaining wall here on the side and
there was a little tiny little house
that was was taken down so with this
project obviously there's views there's
there's a certain geometry which has to
do with different angles of view up and
down the coast but you have this kind of
classic front back problem it's a villa
type in the sense that it's an isolated
building it's got views on all sides it
has neighbors it's such a large property
you know the sequence of driving this is
uphill like this so you come up you
drive up you get a glimpse of the house
and of course the back which is the the
garage here and so the entry really
becomes the back and then the view is
forward so all sorts of technical
requirements this is actually a fire
road and this has to have fire truck
turn around which is convenient for
these kind of things because people have
large parties and they need people to
park on the on the site so the turn
around becomes a kind of parking area
etc yeah I think it is
yeah can you see it maybe it's too fast
I'm jiggling it so when you entered the
house from the back parking is here you
can slip through he can slip through
here to go right up to his bedroom or
here the kind of formal entry of
visitors and you go half a level down or
half a level up to the bedrooms and so
the whole sequence is this kind of
s-shaped that runs through of the house
and opens up and of course to the big
open dining living a pool is engaged
here with a trellis the obligatory home
theater here a little library on this
side so then the second floor and you've
you know that's the first floor sorry
this is a repeat of the first floor I
just took you through just a bigger
scale the second floor then up here you
come through and this is his kind of a
bedroom closet of course the master and
then two guest rooms and so you see
these kind of things that peal out are
our way and you'll see this in another
project later because of the way the
zoning worked the massing was kicked
ated a certain way this is our way of
cheating ocean views to a room that if
you did it just 90 degrees you know
you'd just be at the side property so
you'll see a photograph of that later
and then this diagram really which talks
about that movement and sequence through
of going down as appeal out windows here
they're kind of large viewed this way
and then circulation through and down to
the pool and a fire pit on that side
it's kind of sectional cuts that we do
through the project you'll see a lot of
those later here this this shows the
kind of
height is quite a big slope on the site
that's the existing retaining wall there
and then the aerial of the final I final
project so this is kind of coming up the
side of trying to sequence this is from
the driveway looking up we turn around
you're starting to get to the entry and
this is the kind of formal entry with
all the doors open you can see through
the house and this is that hall as you
come down then out into the
living room and the pool in the
background of course the ocean view in
the past this is the second floor we're
looking back in that hallway which is
really the main movement of the house
this is kind of sliding back and forth
and then the bedroom it just opens up to
the deck and then the open bathroom here
so this is like he can be right behind
here is a shower and when you shower you
can look out here look out to the ocean
so this is one of the guest rooms within
those openings that I mentioned here so
it's just like this kind of peels out it
becomes a bench little storage and
that's of course the ocean view to the
outside
he was uh he's still a client of ours
I'm gonna show you another project we
did for him and he's a very busy
business person and always on the phone
and always pacing and this was outside
his bedroom as a runway for him to just
walk constantly on the phone in a circle
back and forth and around and around
around oddly enough he sold the house
which is another thing that's another
lecture talk about that and he did very
well actually okay this is a little bit
another of these kind of villa types
it's a this projects in South Pasadena
somewhere in there
this is again the figure from our New
York Times friends this project this was
actually part was a remodel but a
significant kind of blown out edition in
the middle right in here these were kind
of existing rooms and these games but
redid all that stuff and and really it's
about this sequence run through you have
the garage here but walking through this
piece and this big room here which is
this is all one story and this big
ceiling that we did which is then cut
with the skylight and then takes you out
towards the views and that the other
stuff was just kind of cleaned out but I
also show it in this it's it's a it's a
downslope this way and then this is a
retaining wall here going up up on the
back and then these are just really
construction shots that we have when I
get to those here's a little bit more
detail the plan so again you know entry
here they have a kind of little sunken
home theater the open living kitchen
dining another living room here a little
bar area here to the terrace and then
these sliding doors which open up to
outside the guest bedrooms and
maybe it's not working well you know
that that's the bedrooms there and so
really it was about with a one-story
house this treatment of this undulating
ceiling I'm just going to twist and
bends and then cuts and carves to create
this kind of floating mass that organize
organizes most of the house
there you see it in section so yeah
entering you know past the garage you go
through this slot oh this is it under
construction trying to figure out how to
how to build such a thing and then that
finally in the end so this is a
construction shot it's just just kind of
finished
a little bit more
they're basically one room one big room
that's weird huh leave that
it's really weird drawing and that's
something strange happened here well
this is this is a house in Saratoga in
Northern California for an Apple
engineer named Josh Williams he had
lived on the property for a while and he
hired us to do his house and a guest
house and a pool one story house as well
this is downslope this is this winding
road on the side so the house is very
simply a big courtyard that's kind of
broken on one side he had one actually
it's happening right now every year he
has this huge Halloween party with all
his kids and the weather up there it's
not so good and every year he would get
rained out so he said all I really want
Helen
really want is just a big outdoor room
so you'll see that the the living room
opens up to this giant I'm not trying
fairly big courtyard here with a big
opening in the middle so this is his
Halloween party room and then I'm just
gonna move to a better plan so that the
house again the large garage parking
area here you enter it kind of on the
side so it's not an axial relationship
of course with the the court so you slip
in here and then this is a big open
living kitchen dining area and then
these sliding doors open up and back and
then the wings of this of the house of
course are the bedrooms they're wrapped
by this glass wall and a moving sunshade
perforated corrugated tissue here so
there's there's some privacy from it's
kind of like public space here and the
pool when people are over etc you've got
guest rooms here with a court in between
the little pool house so the whole thing
is kind of organized around this edge
and this fairly large scale space
as it opens up there's a fountain and
some other things in here the family
room kind of busts out from the side
with its own private courtyard out the
back so the like the previous house a
one-story house that is really one big
roof form that has a big oculus around
that court in the center and cut so it's
all organized around that you shape
here's a kind of aerial he's just
finishing the pool house now and these
are just under construction it he's
actually moved in but we just haven't
photographed it yet so you give a sense
of the scale of the space with him there
and these doors which you know just
simply go away they could all slid into
that into that pocket that's the entry
entry right here as you slide in past
the little office which is on the side
and then again just an idea of the kind
of tissue of the corrugated as it goes
through those hallways essentially to
the bedrooms this is a project it's just
starting construction this week actually
this is in the Brentwood area of Los
Angeles this is the Getty Center right
here and the house is just right in here
it's on a cul-de-sac which you'll see in
a minute this is the street this is
actually the property that's the
existing house which is being demolished
this week it's a kind of a pretty large
property that is also an upslope as
you'll see
oh boy that's not good maybe that's
better distorted like that yeah for some
reason my site plans are coming in just
slightly distorted well it's not that
distorted here's the cul-de-sac here you
drive up the whole house is a big L
shape like this and right here at this
knuckle where you have the formal entry
is where all the geometry kind of
converges you get the stair you get a
skylight kind of oculus you get this
strip this goes kind of stagger of the
upper floor which is shifted forward and
a fairly large cantilever out here of
the main living room so one of these two
living room houses is the family room in
kitchen this is a formal living room and
below is a whole other wing the whole
house is about 10,000 square feet
including the the basement and the
basement is where the the guest rooms
are so I've switched it around a little
bit but that's the cul-de-sac there
there's parking a garage which is
required and the driveways right here so
you drive past it and this would be for
their in-laws visiting and gasps and
with their own little living room and
then a stair up that gets you to the
main house so that goes down to the
Grouch so this is all essentially deck
outdoor green roof basically with the
pool and then this is the L shape so the
plan you know they won't Park in the
garage they'll park up here of course
because there's an ample space so they
can kind of sneak into their house in
the back from here in the kitchen with a
pantry that's the kitchen and then the
family room and and that dash line
you'll see that's the deck of the
bedrooms all upstairs but the formal
entry is here the guests would park at
the street come up enter through here at
this point the house is is you know you
can even from below walk all the way
around
like a kind of loop through and around
and back this is an elevator everybody's
using doing elevators and houses now
because they're all seeing their parents
get older and it's pretty much a
requirement and all our work so the
second floor is you come up there's a
landing that peels out so you get that
view back of the entry you slide up here
there's a little glass bridge this is
all two-story space rate at that knuckle
and they they slide into their master
bedroom this way this is an open bath
the closet and then of course this deck
here there are two children have these
rooms and their bathrooms on the back so
here you see in this drawing we're
really trying to show explore that that
knuckle that that heart of the house
where everybody's going up and down and
meeting and and and and really the
convergence of all this geometry is
occurring in that one spot
this is the 3d model of it
and then what it'll kind of look like
eventually when we get to it
all right these next few projects I'm
going to show her these almost in fills
so that's it for for the villas these
are tighter sights I wouldn't say
they're necessarily more modest houses
depending on what they are the first one
I'll show you is actually a spec house
specular pass which we don't usually
really do so this is a investors wanting
to just build a house in Venice and then
and then sell it but it speaks to maybe
one of the last projects that I'll show
later in terms of this problem of kind
of front back very simple problem with
houses you know where you have a public
front and a front yard which is rarely
used really this is this kind of the
suburban front yard
the versus back yard and all the privacy
that it has and in this one really
straightforward it's it's it's one of
the first ones where we're really
actually exploring the side yard right
it's a very narrow kind of shotgun house
in some ways very straightforward
cantilever the second floor cantilever
is over this area it's got a pool that's
engaged with the house but you've always
got this problem with the front of
course the garage takes over such a
massive amount of it there's no way
really unless you you bury it and also
one that we did that you know you go
underground so very simply it's just
it's like a house with an ear and you
enter on the on the right ear that as it
pops out you get a glimpse of the yard
and the the living room and it's
ambiguous in the sense that it's
expanding out it's not necessary
ignoring the rear yard which has a
future guest house if they want it it's
jammed all the way to the front and very
straightforward but in a way effective
and I think it's a precursor to the last
project so I'll show you in China which
really explore this idea may be a much
more complex way
and so here it is you know it's just
like we got in here ya know that's where
answer and then you get this which to me
is to the whole house it's this weird
thing like wait a second what's I'm
looking through this yard on one side
and then and then the living room on the
other so it's like this in a very simple
way trying to speak to this this kind of
front back side and an emphasis on the
side and then of course you go through
the house and it's opening up to the
landscape this kind of thing
this is also as the same figure-ground
because it's the same part of Pasadena
sang residents which is also on a very
tight site very limited on that area we
could we could do and so I would say
that most of our clients are maximizing
their the absolute buildable area that
we can do and the laws are getting
harder and harder you know you've heard
about the kind of McMansion ization code
ordinances which limit area and height
with houses and this was in South
Pasadena where there's pretty strict
zoning regulations for that very odd
first planned a show of the project but
I show it because this this is really
the limits of the house it's just this
box like that driveway up slope to the
to the first floor
he didn't say he he collects cars he
wanted to collect cars he hadn't
collected cars yet and so we we weren't
allowed to make this a room but we we
made this outside that's covered and
deck and we made this wall and he's
gonna tear this wall down because the
garage is gonna he's going to use all
that as garage and enclosed this so
we're kind of cheated this through the
regulation but it's high so that he can
put a lift in it and he can you know
work on some some some of his cars he's
actually a doctor but in this kind of
extended plinth so the whole house is
kind of on this base and then you get to
the first floor which is you you walk up
here you enter and on the lower level
and then you slide up this staircase
here with this slot in the middle so
this house is essentially forgetting
about the side yards it's like built to
the max on the edges it's a very
straight forward sense of you know the
front it's just utilitarian and and then
the back is where the plinth and a
little bit of a garden and then a
a cut down to that basement room so he
can walk up here walk up and then and
then a very compact you know a little
guest bathroom living room dining room
in the center where there's this cut and
then of course the kitchen this is as
little at the landing level little area
for his office right here which kind of
overlooks and underneath it which is a
window down to the driveway so the
second floor I mean just super compact
too you know
bedrooms for the kids and then and then
their bedroom and closets etc and
outside decks here and then you one
walks up through this and then a bridge
in between this void and this is the
section so here you see the extended
kind of large garage this thing sits on
this plinth the opening down to the
living room and then that half level
which is his little office which is cut
above
and so all that then it's just the the
void is glass from the the ceiling all
the way down to the back which you'll
see
and then really from there back terraces
where they get the view out into the
landscape so this is the front again
these were still kind of messy it's
still those before they moved in but
still under construction so this is that
mid-level window this bends down to
signify the kind of entry here because
you slide in and then up that's his
little studio and then there's the upper
bedrooms this is looking up it's not
quite finished the stair
oh there's Helen there's Helen one of
their kids so that we're looking back at
that slot window that's at the front
this is the front of the house right
where she is there and then back
this actually isn't a house but it's for
the same client as the first house I
should name's Mike Paxton and this is
his office building but it's so small
it's almost like a house plus it also
kind of relates to some of the other
things that I'm thinking about this this
project I'm so glad Jeff is here because
Jeff you don't know this but you totally
influenced this project Jeff gave a
lecture was one of your many lectures
two thesis students and he gave a
lecture just on openings you probably
have heard it he talks about within
Cherise house you show Remz house you
talk about the strip window you talk
about the stuff and it you know we were
designing this project and you know when
you're faced with like this kind of
project so it's a remodel of an existing
Tudor office building so we were gonna
just strip the thing down a lot a lot of
constraints it was really just a facade
so and it's in essence I remember seeing
your lecture and I said this is the
problem I'm working on right now which
is a project it's really just about
opening some facades so the project is
essentially about openings so that's how
I'm gonna talk about it and that's
really what the project is so here's
here's the plan of it it's a it's a odd
site it's a kind of a corner project
that's not a corner in a way as of
course the gas station is on the real
corner this is an alley which goes to a
parking garage of this office building
so and then there's parking on the side
and then he has a little bitty lot here
and it's just a two-story 7,000 square
foot building the bottom is retail and
his office occupies this floor here and
in a way like a house Mike's office you
know he had a bathroom put in with a
shower sometimes he sleeps at his office
he put a washing machine back in here
and then all his employees sit sit here
the program is very simple open offices
a few enclosed one's a big employee
break room at the corner and then his
office here in the back so he sits right
here
so the whole thing with this bit of this
project is the openings simply react to
this corner so they're trying to instead
of in a not in a non frontal way not
ninety degrees to the surface but
diagonally to address that where it's
more open and in a way it's trying to
scoop past and and say oh this this
parking garage doesn't exist right so
it's all about slipping that way you
enter either here or in the back very
simple like that area or that area and
then we came up with this way of like
his house that you saw earlier peeling
out the windows so that in plan or the
the window is is is not 90 degrees to to
the building it's angled and it's peeled
off so a series of openings which then
at this point we're interested in the
corner this is the unravelling blurring
the two stories this is a special window
at his office so when he sits back here
in his office you'll see he sees this
very specific view to the corner and not
shown in this drawing but dashed in is
the front which are these elevations so
you've got the corner the the lower
floor is just blown out and then these
various peel out windows no that's
essentially the project the model of it
and then here it is so trying to look at
you know things like this are different
levels you know seating levels windows
at your feet this is the one that grabs
down it actually spans from the lower to
the upper you're not quite sure where
the floor is and some different views
that on the right is the street view on
the left it's his office and then that's
the view past the 76 station so this is
Mike's you know Mike's sitting at his
desk he goes right he's enters office
left is out here and that's of course
the inside there
it's a funny intersection it's Tujunga
and Moorpark in Los Angeles this is a
it's in the valley so it's one of these
projects that a lot of people have seen
I guess is they you know I did a lot of
houses people are it's like Oh tell me a
project that I may have seen I mentioned
this project and people are was like oh
you did that oh yeah I Drive by that you
know this is cuz odd thing one of my
best guy Neil Denari texted me a photo
of is he stopped at the gas station he
said he said it's the only piece of
architecture in the valley we're big in
the valley
turns out this project is in Pacific
Palisades which is up aren't where is it
where am I just about up here I believe
one of these streets on the edge a
fairly large house unlike the Pasadena
one but similar in the sense of again
this is like a almost infill project
this one oddly a down slope so you enter
on the on the kind of mid-level and then
it goes it goes down and then one level
up so similar problems that we've had
before with you know the garage but kind
of central entry and this is another one
of these houses where the center has
voided out into this kind of atrium
space that creates a figure which you'll
see in a couple drawings and in a
rendering that that extends from the
entry through and then the back and
essentially on the back it's just a
three story house looking out to an
amazing ocean view so basement level
there's a kind of amphitheater seating
here a little stair that slides really
down from the main floor bedrooms a
family room etcetera and of course the
pool down the slope but the the second
floor you see where you start to see
that void this is that opening there is
here which is a kind of upside down
arch and then on the backside right here
is this piece that's a cut
so the facade essentially becomes that
void as you go through and you're just
sliding into so entire house is
organized around this this movement zone
so you're sliding up this this stair at
that point which this drawing is trying
to describe as the the voice that's that
that cut up through the skylight and
then this is the kind of surface of the
big open room down below
all right we're close here I think this
is the last two projects I'm going to
show this probably may be the most
successful one of this type here I mean
you see this is our kind of figure
ground this is in the middle of the city
just me actually near the Schindler
house not too far from it 50 by 130 foot
lot organized by this cut right through
the house is kind of banana shaped
you'll see that slices through and
becomes the pool in the backyard
another one of these projects we're
fitting everything we can it's a you
know fairly small lot we've got a guest
house a pool house a pool an outdoor
deck a garage semi-subterranean and one
two three four bedrooms all on this in
this in this little area so again you
can see that kind of typical you know a
back front suburban rail pools etc
little garages if they have them on the
side and so here we're really looking at
what the potential of that that this
kind of piece is and almost a kind of
public space as you enter the house so
oh sure yeah we didn't show a basement
plan but this is a driveway and it goes
below so the whole house is lifted up
about three feet and then we excavated
down about six feet for the garage so we
solved that problem by lowering it and
this is essentially this path that cuts
through so you enter the house here
you're at grade level and then you go up
just those three feet and now we're at
that plinth level and the house opens up
you kind of slip and slide in and out of
these kind of two curves that one and
that one to open then it's all blown out
here with one single column there of the
kitchen living dining and all glass and
then a pool engages the facade which
you'll see later here and then all these
doors open and then you've got this kind
of - if they'll walk around here and go
down and back up again or access here to
the pool and the studio for her in the
back little guest room here and pantry
side door essentially another moment I
didn't do the then and then upstairs
very simple at that when you come up
there's a landing at the lower at a
lower level you look out back at the
front deck here and then you switch back
up and you can slip right into the
master bedroom with a deck closet and
bath here or a glass bridge across to
their daughter's room here with a kind
of parallel set of decks and a bathroom
in the back so here you can see in these
drawings what were the since it was
basically two houses side-by-side they
had to be laterally connected there's a
few different ways we could have done
that we could have let them slip but the
amount of movement that they were
required for us to deal with it's like
four inches or something and it would
kill all a glass and would have gotten
big sorts of things so we created this
kind of stitch of a single pipe that
connects a
kind of horizontal beam that slips
through the skylight and actually
literally ties the two houses together
and then this is a drawing of ours just
starting to look at all these kind of
elements as they connect through the
house whether that's a stair that's part
plinth and then freeze up you'll see
later how materiality comes into play
with that again the diagram
figure-ground and then this kind of
assemblage of a kind of choreograph of
movement through the heart of this house
so when you enter the there's a wall
here it's made in polycarbonate that
hooks over like a kind of veil which is
all LED lit that is a sunshade this
amount of Sun that's south on this side
this is north
so that's shaped in such a way that you
can still see out from in the house but
then also deals with the Sun this is his
office here obviously you come in this
is the entry
mm-hmm similar shot a little bit closer
so you're starting to see that slot as
it comes in now you enter the house and
this is really where it opens up so the
water of course is at the floor level
and and this is seamless as well as
these doors open up that's the guest
house the pool house is here it's just
got frosted glass so at night it can
light up and be a kind of lantern and
then this is that slot as it cuts down
that's the bridge that connects the two
wings so that's their master bedroom on
the left up top and then looking back so
the the stitching of the trust becomes
the railing as this piece and this is
really this is as if the base is raising
up it cuts down the stair this this
stair belongs to the ceiling it's done
in the same kind of dark walnut
evany material the frieze up so when one
understands the plinth at this point and
then you're on to a different system and
then at the landing of course which is
where you're looking back out to the
public
this dog is saying who the hell designed
this place
he's looking back at the it's actually
sweet dog looking back at that that slot
again and then in the kitchen the hidden
projector
things like this you know the the
fireplace becomes the glass the opening
and a giant bench on the side and just
at a different scale of the living room
and that that walls kept open because
they sometimes project it project from
the TV but then to the right here is the
kind of more intimate in a living room
with a little piano and a television in
the back and this is that slot you come
up from for the garage so you just
slightly they day-to-day come in that
way and then on the second floor looking
back this is where that slip occurs they
kind of go left their doors through
through the bedroom and the kids bedroom
to the right and then that bedroom that
extends out
from the bathroom
huh two bathrooms right
yeah the I think I have a shot of it
that yeah yeah so this is jacuzzi
so the jacuzzi flows higher into that
pool and that pool that's a three
quarter inch drop between stone and
there's like a angled V underneath there
and that's where all the water yes in
there yep
sorry
yeah yeah there was talk about that
about in the teenage years whether or
not people will be jumping from here to
there which is quite possible yeah yeah
so here it is from the back okay this is
the last project this is the last last
house as a project we actually designed
a few years ago we were asked to do 54
houses as part of a large development in
the city of Chengdu and as a development
company that basically in the outskirts
of the city really removed from the city
in this area we're planning millions of
square feet of housing office all sorts
of things is basically on land that was
flooded rice paddies so they were
flooding them making their called Lux
Lakes villas and this is it fairly
horrifying and our part is right here
that's all we had to do antoine predock
did a building here some other la
architects had these things thom mayne
was gonna design this whole thing they
they are many many architects to work on
it's been years in the making and then
oddly enough this is it early yeah this
is the main road the city's this way but
while we were working on I think this is
an antoine predock building here and
while we were working on it they said oh
we have a problem with the mayor there's
a new mayor in Chengdu we said what's
the problem he said well you see this
road this is a straight road to the
center of the
the city and he says the road shouldn't
turn the road should go straight the
mine deeds of road was built the
highways bill predock's building was
about 90% done and I said so what are
you gonna do said we got to make the
road straight so they cut free talks of
building in half and they made the road
straight you know and the audacity of at
least this kind of work one is either
horrified by or some some level respect
so we were essentially given as I said
this this area here and it was planned
for 54 houses and they are all on these
kind of little Lots but they were they
were going to be three-story that was
clear and they were big like 5,000
square feet five bedrooms you know these
kind of things so so we began to work on
these and what we really tried to do is
work on the stuff in between so there's
all sorts of geometries going on there's
this kind of notion of a fluidity from
front to back that you'll see in detail
later but what we're really doing is
saying like can we make space in between
lots so these aren't totally just front
back it's odd that they called the
villas you know they actually called
villas like Lux Lux leaks it was there
not really I mean there was pretty
compact stuff right small lots with all
the same things you know you drive in
this side and then this is water
everybody gets a water front right
everybody gets a water view but what
we're really interested in are these
spaces in between this like even the
Venice house it showed you developing
this kind of side which is a more
ambiguous understanding of how these
things work and it also frees up the
plan so the plans become it's almost
like every room has light light from all
different sides right like like a villa
would
in many ways so we decide six different
types out of the fifty-five and I'm
gonna show you four and plan and then
you're gonna see some of them built
similar to some of the other projects
this is the basement level which is
essentially water level okay so the road
level is one level up which we'll see
and then bedrooms second so this is like
what you'd call boat level so the waters
here and you know what goes down and in
those in those kind of spaces are of
course the home theater like small
maid's quarters and then the other kind
of game room living room and so and a
pool so that was the kind of these were
the program pieces that we had to work
with everyone had to have a pool
everyone had to have these certain kinds
of rooms so they kind of self organized
by level in a straightforward way but
then okay we're starting to work on them
now and break them apart as you
circulate through always each one it's
very special how you go level to level
like in this case you go to the second
floor and you're up here when you see
these plans and you say well what's
going on with these thicknesses it's
they're all concrete so they're built in
but they're they're concrete quality
there and steel rebar quality is at a
lower level which means the span the
spans are far less than we would
normally think concrete can do so this
is like maybe 6 meter 5 meter spans
about 18 feet and the columns are like
50 centimeters thick you know it wasn't
intentional we had to deal with this
stuff so you see you know things like
you know let's see where you know like
that right thickened walls into these
columns but in case the intent was now
rooms kind of free up in these losses is
one of the wider lots right so we could
come in we could go down to the basement
we go upstairs they've got a regular
kitchen and then a kind of special walk
kitchen which is kind of really intense
fume hood up here you know the two-car
garage library study formal living room
in this case here and then upstairs
you know the bedrooms get divided the
master always being the largest guest
rooms in the back etc and then this all
being that that movement space there
another type this one a little bit
narrower same kind of program and this
one I mean we're doing things like you
know this is a pool above this room you
know so it's all concrete and so when
you go to this level you know that's the
swimming pool on the edge so you've got
these upper and again the side yard here
in this case you can actually enter on
that side yard off off this side you you
get it right these are kind of getting
slotted getting cut down the middle here
when we get to the upper level this
one's narrower it's got some exterior
decks on it this big stair up into the
bedrooms and that slot down in the
middle this one this one was definitely
one of the ones that you'll see in a
photograph this one again the you're
seeing the flows that run through this
one has a kind of object inside the
house this is kind of boat shape which
holds the master master bedroom that's
kind of this is a glass wall around it
and that slides and slips out as a
balcony as you come up this way
one odd one which is this kind of corner
site that had to do with the how these
lots were dictated so this one's a
little bit different shape I'm not doing
similar things so this shows you know
the kind of excavation essentially so
the road is high and then this is all
the retaining walls right that'll be
built to cut through here model the
three of the units so while there may be
divisions of course between houses and
maybe a fence etc at least at a spacial
level we're trying to create these
volumes that are that this one internal
this one between two houses and then
different studies well this this really
speaks again to that every room gets
kind of a view of the water by creating
this kind of porous system you're also
allowing you know as you're moving in
and out of this stuff are always engaged
back into the the lake in some of our
earlier rendering so there stone and
metal it's very interesting I took them
to a house the the first house I showed
which was a concrete floor so it's
really interesting to me so the
development team came out they wanted to
see our work to see if we could really
do this stuff and so I took him to that
house and they weren't really that
impressed with it actually one thing
they said I've had concrete floors and I
said this is concrete you know that's
great you just grind the concrete and
they said never never
and I said why is this as I said that's
when we were poor we had concrete floors
so in the clientele who are buying these
and the materiality is and you'll see
there's a bit ostentatious so we say
that it wants to have the symbol of
luxury and materiality we were always
like no it's fine just white and gray
like can we just you know yeah so there
were some issues with the interiors at
that point so we took these projects to
this level and then they said thank you
very much you're done they paid us
they're great it was really good and
then three months ago we got some
photographs that I'm gonna show you and
I said that Margaret I said you know
what just happened
like eighteen years we've been doing all
this stuff we've probably built like 20
houses our total output just doubled in
one day
54 houses that you're gonna see in a
minute this is the one
yeah so they're almost done
here you can start to see some of those
types here they are
they're not bad no they they're exactly
the way we designed them in terms of the
volume and the geometry we had given
them Rhino models of all the geometry
which went to structural and all that
stuff
and the exterior with we had been there
and picked various types of stone like
you know stone roofs even stone roofs of
walls the interiors have got a little
bit away from us but they're essentially
what's that just before the outlaw of
crazy architecture right exactly
mm-hmm yeah so here you mean yeah it
does what we tried to do I mean there
they are right those pieces these are
the first ones that are finished so
they're just now this year phasing them
through when you saw the this this is
their construction shed and storage area
that's going to be all water so once
this this is these are the once they're
their most finished they retreat that
way this will get excavated and that's
all water in there you can see it right
in the upper left right there right
see that this kind of stuff yeah
yeah
thank you
yeah we talked to the photographers who
gave us this images though we're sending
them back again to do our own shots
these were commissioned by the company
so we would art direct them slightly
differently but it's basically
we imagine that as synthetic and blue
but it works in wood - thanks
you
