so we're gonna go and get started good
evening everyone and welcome to the
Balmer series my name is Eric Berman I'm
an assistant professor of our picture
here at Hamilton school
and it's my privilege to introduce
tonight's speaker Zach come on - zach is
the co-founder of common craft which is
an architectural practice based in
Brooklyn and the SAO visiting assistant
professor in architecture this year at
Norman through his research teaching and
practice zach cultivates a dual material
and philosophical project and digital
fabrication his specific focus is in
digital include new notions of digital
craft and interrogate the architect
machine relationship zach earned his
Master of Science in architecture
studies at MIT in 2018 page turner where
he received the arthur Raj special files
for academic achievement he was a
researcher at the MIT self-assembly lab
and talked courses in digital
fabrication and design and MIT and the
Wentworth Institute of Technology he
also holds a Bachelor of architecture
whoo Carnegie Mellon University with
highest honors prior to study at MIT is
that practice at and architects Steven
Holl architects and Marvel architects in
England
sex work is at the intersection of
technology and performance something you
may have noticed if you've been down the
lab as he forces pilots of deposition
columns or saw his eight hour lie of
fuzzy printing performance earlier this
semester in space right behind this
watching Zack construct his own machines
as past minister makes clear that is
part of a new generation of visual
fabricators less enthralled by high
water acts performed by advanced robot
arms and other tools of heavy industry
instead
exactly for activism instruments his
work utilize assistant
those techniques may diffuse but the DIY
movement 3d printed and micro computing
he's part of an emerging generation of
digital fabricators just beginning to
explore the aesthetic and performative
range made possible by low-tech
distributable and perhaps most
importantly more accessible technologies
this past weekend at the wonderful
roaming the machine symposium he
organized with elements as a carpenter
brief introduction to digital
fabrication in architecture he began
with Bill masters project ps1 a project
whose director had Japan to CNC
production methods paralleled a fraught
conversation on the fate of drawing and
architecture speculations of the term
were abound on how these technologies
might even eleminate the need for
drawing all together in this tension
arose because architecture might
eventually be understood as a libretto a
two-stage part that requires first the
preparation of instructions typically
drawings and second in the performance
or in the act of building traditionally
instructions in architecture about the
description geometry through
orthographic projections of the world
but notably the code or instructions
that prepares in collaboration with his
own machines a more akin to the musical
score in the architectural drawing set
it is the notation where form is
rendered through cadence tempo rhythm as
material deposits use time and speed and
the all-important pause to render new
material possibilities in this way as
experts might be better understood as
the description time rather than a
descriptive project of geometry Zacks
work also engages the feedback loops
between architects and their tools his
work isn't on improvisation acknowledges
the aleatory nature of materials our
environment and importantly designers
themselves and this is where it's at
spark resistance potential any questions
for digital fabrication particularly at
a time when the line between ourselves
and our machines is getting actively
work through new models of collaboration
and as our machines gets smaller more
agile and more personal
Zac's project explores the possibilities
between the future that means work in
order to understand them to my own terms
but also speculate on the ways in which
they could work differently what these
ways new ways of working money for
architecture
I imagine theatres the digital
fabrication to be like other theoretical
fields like theoretical physics in
theoretical computer science in which
abstract models of actual phenomena are
used to rationalize and predict what
things that things that might actually
happen just like in the experimental
fields the work that comes out of
theoretical teacher fabrication does it
immediately lend itself to utility it's
more about critical reflection in what
ifs and iterally working through
concepts it's not I believe unlike the
architectural design process itself I
think it's important to acknowledge that
my theorization of how digital
fabrication machines works begins with
examining how I work as a designer and
as a material body I understand that
this could be read like some kind of
egotistical crusade or even a weird form
of sub psychoanalysis let me say now but
I don't do this because I think I'm the
best designer or the perfect specimen
but because I believe that each of us
architectural designers think to
cultivate intuition of the ways in which
we work prior to engaging with tools
machines particularly those that have
what I would call frictionless
interfaces I use myself as a subject in
order to demonstrate what such a process
of cultivating intuition and creating
friction might look like I should also
say in a similar vein because I'm
nice project there is undeniably
personal stakes in the work that I do I
feel he does that in architecture in
general and digital technologies more
specifically we don't tend to omit the
degrees to which there are personal
stakes and maybe it's for good cause but
to me the very physicality of making
things makes the act of making
inherently personal you can't not make
or id8 things in our own bodies
even though current research into the
fabrication points to a future with just
that happen and so the act of making
ineffability reflects our individual
embodiments and perceptions I think this
is an inevitability that we should all I
also think on a related note that
digital technology in general is already
extremely personal we willing to
document our thoughts and share
important moments via social media and
unwillingly share information about
ourselves through Google searches
Facebook feeds Amazon purchases and so
on so there's already a kind of bio
politics at play at digital school in
today's digital culture and I think
architects need to engage in Spile
politics by getting physical with our
digital things that said much of this
top will be autobiographical or even
memoir like I hope that while the work
is personal the takeaways were relatable
so tonight I'm going to show the feed
ongoing research projects each and two
parts in each at varying levels of
development none of these projects are
what we might call complete words or
rather processes and I'm very much in
the process of working through the first
part of each project involves you making
something usually something absurd or
the very least not immediately or
identified the architectural
the second part of each project involves
me using the learnings from this thing
that I made or did to theorize and
reconfigure digital fabrication because
I think it might be helpful and because
as you later find out I like to delay
things
let me prolong this prologue with a
couple quick introduction definitions
the first is my own and the one that
I've already mentioned i define
theoretical with digital fabrication as
the practice of prototyping fear of the
models of how digital fabrication
machines work in order to speculate on
digital aesthetics robotic construction
method
and second definition I like the
sheriff's from an early 20th century
continental philosophy of boundary
Bergson whose thinking has been very
influential Brixton defines intuition as
the sympathy vote one is transported
into the interior object in order to
coincide I thought there is unique and
consequently inexpressible I won't go
into what I think this means just yet
but instead will using this kind of
philosophical backdrop since I think it
resonates at my approach design and
research and I'll circle back to it at
the end and try to show my I think that
so this talk is called Vikki machines
but since I like subtitles and more
delays you can also call out how to
build sympathy with the builders so
during my undergraduate at Penn State I
was investigating how architecture could
be in form or in service of nonviolent
resistance specifically nonviolent
resistance to the Performing Arts and
specifically Palestinian nonviolent
resistance to the Performing Arts but
that's another project for another time
what I want to talk about today is that
part of this work was conceptualized on
how architecture could be nonviolent
resistance and I would do that through
these experiments part which I saw on
screen I'll show again I'm in my studio
at the time which I would breathe into a
paper bag for hours and hours matters
and then at the same time I would
simultaneously projected the video of
the surface of the bag onto an adjacent
wall the wall eterna performs like it
was breathing
pushing out or we could even say non
violently resisting at surroundings so
here I enjoy the beginning great timing
you should all appreciate where you are
after having an initial met on my desk
for several days I realize I had
actually held my breath for a really
long time so I'm honestly not sure how
but I came up the idea of sending bags
of my breath
and in case they didn't know and I
imagined them many of them had no idea
what was going on I rolled on the bags
this is my breath and it the boxes with
the bags of breath or what I call pops I
place it hard I would take them to a
website where they find instructions for
holding your breath procure a brown
paper bag a drinking straw and some tea
take the paper bag shut make a small
incision in the paper bag stick the
drinking straw inside breathe through
the straw into the paper bag breathe in
and out as many times as necessary to
ensure that the best breath is inside
fill the bag with your breath leave the
straw inside send it back to someone you
want to hold your breath and I said
dozens of bags to different people over
the course of several years
some people would send me photos of the
bags once they had them and some people
told me that they just threw them out
and others would inhale it and then
throw it out which was interesting and
then others within kala and then fill it
with their own breath and then send that
back to someone else that record this
way and some people would even create
their own and others would simply keep
those mental pieces for as long as the
referent lasts so at the same time that
I was doing my research on the
architecture is not about resistance in
my box I'm just learning how to use
erotic art and when you learn how to use
an industrial robotic are among the
first things that you learned how they
hold off tools and they do this in part
by having a continuous internal air flow
that enables them to basically pick up
things through suction but they think
they don't teach you about robotic arms
is what to use them for it so I like to
call them nothing machines because
they're designed purposefully did do
nothing anything that we instruct them
to do so in other words they can perform
any task that we can imagine so like
anyone else I had to imagine my own use
robotic arm and since one of the things
I knew about it was that it had this
regional airflow in order to pull arms
of tools I thought to myself what if I
imagine that the world
and then I thought what if I get the
robot believe me and to me these are two
different but related theoretical models
of digital fabrication so in this
initial experimentation I program really
basic tool cuts because it wasn't so
much about geometries or tuned in a kind
of particular form as is also in cases
interpretation I really just wanted to
understand the relationship between the
concrete and the robot and their
distinct temporal processes one being
finite and the other being potentially
endless and one thing I found
interesting is that the materiality of
these panels expresses this kind of
violent tension between these distinct
temporalities the robot relentlessly
breathing on the concrete the concrete
continually trying to form itself what
you end up with is this piece of popular
looks like in heaven - cutting into it
or like it was strategically and
precisely or a little bit or if you
reduce the air pressure you can then
actually create more subtle surface
textures so you're the panel looks like
a frozen frozen concrete
what I've had to be most interesting is
that you can use this technique which I
call robotic exhalation to form channels
and apertures into concrete panels which
otherwise it's not such a
straightforward thing to do
so this finding may be interested in
this idea that you can embed the
performance of making a thing into the
performance of the thing itself here for
example air is used to create Airy
concrete panels in the end we could say
that the concrete itself is also
breathing so this research is really
fluid entering the house they haven't
really done anything since 2011 when I
first learned about robotic arms I like
to revisit sometime in the future
I share it now mainly because for me it
exemplifies the practice that I called
theoretical physics application taking
abstract ideas of how I work in this
case as a physical body and using them
to rethink the ways in which I work with
machines and then importantly
speculating on the creative implications
of this process of reframe so I wrote on
hundreds of $1 bills for several years
almost every day at some point on the
break down the first thing that came to
my mind on the dollar bill is whenever
my first impulse was I would put it down
and I would spend that dollar bill and
secretly to myself I call the project
banknotes and I really thought about it
for a long time in part because I wasn't
totally sure it was legal but I took a
photo of each Bank LaVon just in case
anyone any one of them came back to me I
have proof for better or worse and
they're really worth hundred so tonight
I will show you a few of them and it was
part socio-economic experiment I wanted
to see how long it takes a while my
banknotes come back to me in part that I
was working in an office and I was
feeling Restless and not like I was not
creating anything as many of you might
have felt working in an office or my
field later I'm working office so the
bank notes were my way of constantly
putting something of value of the world
ok abrupt change fast forward a few
years I'm learning how to write software
for 3d printers as part of my graduate
thesis work and as some of you may know
and all my students definitely
3d printers use a very specific
programming language called G code which
gives the printer instructions from how
to make them so this says for example go
to X thirty six point three seven six
five thirteen point three six six and
put this amount of material and go here
and put this amount of material and so
on so on and so on so we can tell just
by looking at their cheat code is a
series of repetitive instructions and as
many of you also might know the 3d
printer continually repeats these series
that are almost identical in order to
just slowly build up 3d printed things
so I like to think of the 3d printer as
as basically a repetition okay back to
the bank that's yeah as I was beginning
to conceptualize in the thesis work in
digital fabrication I reflected on the
banknotes and my own repetition of
writing one almost every day for several
years and as part of this reflection and
extracting what the banknotes really
meant to me as a digital fabricator and
a digital circuit
I literally extracted each message and
eats a serial number from each novel
that I wrote it's also made me
interesting to point out that I
automated in this process with the
script because it just so happened that
I wrote a blue shark boot which is
really easy to pick up and if the
messages were not served before they
took on even greater absurdity but also
I would say a greater meaning now so
this one says the hands are not the
problem when the feet to be moved in
most directions and I thought I never
been talked about before
headgear is just another word for
pronunciation master something else'
postman pushing the pencil just ahead of
Nova Tori's
step right up and see monsters that go
to start with it wrong
and I can have these back nuts into a
book also caught something female and
this whole process of unpacking a
strange project that I've been doing for
several years how we can see that what I
was really doing with my banknotes was
pairing the serial nature of the dollar
bill with my own serial nature in order
to give the dollar bill which is a thing
born from mechanical reproduction a
different kind of mechanical value I
would say value that reflected my own
mechanics so while I was learning
directly through your picture I asked
myself what it's like I did with the
dollar bills I paired the 3d printer
serial nature of mine and in response to
that Thera throw question I envisioned a
3d printing software in which the
designer tells each line on a 3d printer
so I'll be honest at first I had no idea
that would do this and I didn't know
anything about programming or
electronics so I just started piecing
things together with what technical
knowledge I did have so my first
iteration which is here I drew a circle
or something close to a circle and trace
the circle of multiple times and scanned
it span those faces into a computer Rob
those traces into Rhino turn the image
into images into lines snap the lines
vertically extruded them and then 3d
printed resulting form so it was a
pretty comfy process
the second iteration was a little bit
elaborate and a little more refined a
real visual analysis script
that could be when we determine any
photo it's a decode and I made a paper
halting attachment for my laptop which
is this little wooden frame a perfectly
line with its built-in camera so I'm
hanging each sheet of trace paper on the
paper holder
take a photo of it turn into decode and
then compile ohnkoji code into a single
text file and finally I consolidated
span and compiling a virtual
communication into one piece of software
I also programmed an interface to go
with it which I'll show in a moment so
in this word code the designer draws and
traces each line of the 3d print on a
sheet of trace which is overlaid on top
of the graphics tablet as soon as the
designer picks up their pen
where it sends the trace to the 3d
printer which then prints it moves up a
letter and waits for the next race
there's also a retrace button what I
call a retracement which you can kind of
see here which enables the designer to
automatically repeat any trace without
having to physically trace it again
so the retrace button enables is not
essentially to add moments a smooth
listen to this otherwise pretty sketchy
thing I also built in a function that
makes the amount of extrusion relative
to how hard the designer presses on the
tablet when they're tracing so the
harder you press the more plastic that
comes out and the idea was that it would
make extrusion and control haptic and
that's hopefully more intuitive so
here's what the interface normally looks
like it's basic information like
pressure and the number of traces after
each trace the trace line disappears and
then reappears as a file on what I call
the trace Bank there on the Left where
it can be selected and then retraced
automatically and so why do I pop this
is that came out of this experimentation
was that it's actually impossible for us
to trace our own lines precisely the 3d
printer on the other hand can reproduce
everything a perfect race perfectly so
if in act minute it actually tends to
amplify imperfections by compounding so
I would say that is the precise
reproducibility of the 3d printer and
precise repetition of the designer puts
forth a materiality that neither of the
design and the weather machine could on
the road I also find interesting was
that the software enables you to
improvise forms
line my language face to face so things
that actually might be quite difficult
to model on a 3d printer if you think
about trying to prepare a digital file
for a 3d printer that's watertight of
this form it's actually not be such an
easy thing to do but here you can
actually build up that file without
having to model anything just trace by
Trace and graduates visit it's an
admittedly rough thing but it's kind of
sketch model
so here again we can see this kind of
hide Remus hybrid missile it's reality
contrast with our normal perception of
3d printed things it's clean rigid and
sterile objects and the 3d printer here
was almost like Peter Ling it's like
legs to this you know to some beasts I
like to look at as you might have been
able to tell for the last product and
actually as as Eric mentioned also an
introduction and to see even more above
the next project as a recurring interest
in my work on time or what the
philosopher Burton would call duration
which roughly give you a define us how
we exist in time so I have this another
hypothesis that for as long as there
have been machines that have been people
waiting for machines and in my opinion
this is waiting for an update kind of
disappointing forms we usually leave the
machine to go to something else we get
angry frustrated or most often if you go
down and you watch people and watch the
CNC right down the shop you'll see them
browsing on their smartphones so these
are actually like waiting for browsers
to learn to look while you wait for the
machine so you have to end up waiting on
you wait now and I think this kind of
interesting waiting loop is something
that we experience on a daily basis
waiting for the elevator I think that 3d
printers are the three ventures is
basically no different we send our files
presto and we walk away and the results
of that impatience to me is that we
become fundamentally disembodiment from
the making of our designs and all the
thinking I go sighs so this software
theorizes is the value of waiting with
the machine of embodying a machines
temporality and repetition or just
sympathize with it and I argue that you
can in a sense reading by our own making
processes processes by the body of the
machine and you could say so what's so
great about making things physically I
think that's a really great question
that we should probably head out and I'm
not going too deep into it I would say
you know
there's a certain fulfillment that comes
with it frankly you know anybody's made
anything physically I think that there's
a certain sense of satisfaction that
comes with working materials that
hopefully you've all experienced in
school so that would be my short answer
to that question though I think you know
the place of physical paths and
education in practice it is obviously
something that or something that should
be accessible the other also mentioned
actually performance I think that at
least with regards to digital
fabrication before making me the means
or a way of stepping outside of our
normal routines and then viewing them
from a distance and I said also if you
look at this photo to me of the kind of
the performance points to the absurd
distance between I don't wait up start
descendants in a kind of negative sense
I mean there's a subservience between
technologies that we use in the spaces
we inhabit on an everyday basis so here
I'm using a 3d printer which has
invented about 35 years ago in his face
in reinforced concrete which has have
been to about 135 years ago and and we
all know that technology moves much
faster than architecture goes with I
think that you know taking the machine
out of the shop and kind of playing with
another locations in recontextualizing
as a kind of test of technology is an
interesting kind of okay you're changing
courses a little bit but staying for a
second on the spirit of performance so I
didn't residency back in 2012 in a small
fishing town Colorado harvest round
which is in the north of Iceland and
there's like 500 people in the town and
each house in the talent has a name
that's an Icelandic
and I send it work so this house is
named week and the house is both the
white and the gray volume you'll see in
a second and week might sound familiar
because it's actually the root of the
word by key or the key and an Icelandic
meeting today so Viking means one who is
from the bay basically so this house is
the bay so the house was almost
completely boarded up when we approached
it we as I was working with a thing
based painter aneurysm at the time and
so when the town was almost completely
boarded up except for this original
structure which is the very bottom which
was completely open and generally used
by the local kids is kind of hang out
where they would go and do mischievous
things and so our basic idea was to
finish the active boarded of the house
and in doing so it to turn the Hangout
into a hideout
essentially the people little kids a
fort to play and be mr. the city but
there's obstacles because we just
graduated he had no money and we were in
a remote town of ice and so we didn't
really have access to that many building
materials so we had to kind of resort to
using only found with donated things so
we got this recycling wood siding so
actually a few years before we arrived
up until a few years before they arrived
they did this experiment or that's
probably for the local school where
students wouldn't unlike you school and
the students would build little houses
for themselves and they stopped painting
projects so they had all I'm just like
really colorful wood that they weren't
using which is really fortunate for us
so we were psychic that website oh we
got a bunch of house paint from our from
the neighbors of the think house and
then probably like two of the most
plentiful Icelandic resources our moss
and rocks and then now that's from the
fishing part because I think I mentioned
before
we were in a fishing town so there's so
here's how we found it on the left and
here's kind of what it looks like on the
right though it's a little difficult to
tell because it's pretty small space and
that's that's I'm planning which colors
are going to go where and you can see
some of what we did here was to
selectively trace the existing cracks in
the concrete surface with the paint
essentially create a composition with
from the existing fragments and services
and you can also see that when we were
done with our intervention the only way
you can get in and out of the space is
through these ladders but the project
really became about these cracks and
misalignments or really how we use the
town or donate the materials at the
point to trace a point to or trace
existing cracks in this one as well as
add new paths and misalignments of our
own so this was also an interesting
moment where we we ran out of screws
because again we didn't have there was a
lot of materials around so instead of
using these wood slats and you normally
went to a kind of vertical orientation
and because we have a ton of wood slats
we just stack them on top of one another
and then what we got was this kind of
composite but all the dripping edges
because you might even how much the boat
kits painting houses they're gonna be
really popular so now that you know that
messiness that sloppiness kind of
becomes a virtue of design it becomes a
feature of this new facade and in the
end the existing landscape could only be
perceived through these these mirrored
existing cups and while I enjoyed the
final result and I think I think
residence it as well what was most
interesting to me and I was this kind of
improvisational process that we engaged
in we're refining materials and then
literally finding places for them in the
space so you can see it kind of
foreshadowing of my improvisational 3d
15 books actually five minutes after
this but it's also a very different kind
of improvisation
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
like the Bob's and the robotic
exploration and improvisational 3d
printing elements of duration and
repetition improvisation and how I
intuitively approach making things but
also I would say a consistent concern
for physicality and touch and what
materials want to do or even I would say
how the materials won't be okay so now
back to decode and for you printing and
five years after Iceland this was around
the same time that I had the idea for
improvisational 3d printing and I
considered this work they're about to
show the movie the second part of the
beat
second part of the beat hi dad so at the
sign on the door wearing the first
versions of my own g-code soft heart and
testing it by having a 3d printer do
unusual things that you couldn't do in
the normal sort so this should sound
familiar to all my students again who
just recently did the same exercise one
of those things are telling you machine
via code to extrude to retract extremely
quick intervals and what I found was
that it couldn't keep up so kind of
instead of hiccup through the printing
process and sporadically spewed material
around and left holes wherever you
normally expect them to open so you can
see this kind of lazy materiality that
resulted from this pattern
hiccuping that's it and in the back and
forth between being at work and being
almost broken suggested to me that the
3d printer needed a certain amount of
time to do work to be functional being
sick so I came up with this theory that
I call a machine delay which states that
all machines take time to do with and so
we could then ask whose time well what
time is the Machine take I think for me
dance is pretty clear and I kind of
alluded to it in my apartment 3d
printing work is that the machines take
art so then I asked well what if I take
the machines time and then what if I
delete this year and this led to the
development of a temporal or time-based
model of digital fabrication so
previously we saw anthropomorphic and
the material model now I would say this
is more of a temporal order more time
just and to test this model I developed
a method of 3d printing concrete that is
founded on two legs so on the left you
can see normal robot code for robot
which is similar to G code and then it's
a series of point locations for now as
those ABC dots which are actually the
kinematics on the right you can see my
modified robot code and which I
literally tell the robot to wait wait is
the command for wait which i think is
amazing in a sense and so what this does
is it says go to for 2060 25 turn on the
printing system wait a little bit for
material come out turn off the printing
system and then basically wait for the
material or the extruder to bleed out
and set and then move to the next point
and do the same thing and so I went to
mystic time-based deposition but since I
always like subtitles I also just call
it dripping and the research involved
designing and building a little concrete
through your printing system which I
won't go into I won't go in to really do
it but I just want to point it out to
say that always it was no way necessary
and
helpful for me to create the bespoke
machine in order to do this kind of
theoretical research in order to make
sort of
[Music]
so the visualization on the ledge to
imagine that each drop have its own
flock and the robot becomes
ever taken way too much material
measurement
so here's a close-up of that process
which is what I would say is a standard
dirty process and maybe taking out of a
this aluminum plate which actually ended
up becoming really important to the
current research on paper which I'll
show in a few months but it kind of ends
up flattening you continue on the right
and flattening drops so that you can
stack somewhat level courses okay so a
lot of the temporal parameters I call
extrusion title and let's say the drop
is on a piece of geometry so much as is
that so much as it is a temporal unit so
for example this is the materialization
of turning the extruder on for one
second two seconds three seconds four
seconds and so the literal
materialization of one second we could
say and I think it's also pretty clear
to see how extrusion time determines the
size of the material deposit at the drop
or at the drop point
the other main temporal parameter is
something I call the wait time which is
the variation for which the robot waits
before moving from one job to the next
so this parameter controls how much one
drops one drop conforms to the drops
around it and in this diagram similarly
we can see there's five separate stacks
with increasingly more weight times 5 10
15 20 25 and the five second one kind of
slumped into amounts really per mass the
other a couple other parameters one is
the travel time and this is affected by
the robots but I started to proximity
the order of the drops as well as the
the robot speed so here for example it
was printing a 10% speed on the left and
100% speed on the right and maybe as a
kind of side note when I think this was
just
to me is is that delayed you can see
that delay is actually the relative
relationship so if you're going really
fast and you make it abrupt stop this
kind of bulb it forms at the end it's
really pronounced if you're already
going slow if you're already delayed
let's say and there's less delay at the
end and so I mean again I could talk for
a while about the philosophical
implications of that or at all but I
think that could be but I think that
this idea that I figure out a kind of
slow pace to begin with there's less
delay it was less pronounced doing and
much of the research was tuning the
mechanical and computational parameters
to the material parameters and then
speculate on results so for example if
you have two inch plasticizer you'll get
this which is essentially just a puddle
and we could look at this we could say
okay maybe it's maybe they're like
concrete shingles which is always
interesting but it's probably not what
we want
and then a little less plasticizer will
get you this which i think is
interesting because it's interlocking
the saddle configuration and not enough
what time will get you this so when you
don't wait for long enough for the
material just collapses like a mountain
I saw and you saw in the previous
diagram and eventually he's sort of
start to find the right tune between
different parameters but here it's kinda
it's complaining beginning innocence and
eventually it was something that looks
maybe vaguely architectural
so it was important to kind of step
establish a control over the dripping
with the dog out over all these
parameters so that I could then
speculate on aesthetic and constructive
possibilities so for example within a
standard stack of drops I can now insert
longer extrusion times in order to
intentionally odd ornaments so here I'm
plotting this kind of tongue-like
in order or I can move the extruder
during the wait time so that the bleedin
material becomes the kind of ornamental
tips here I'm dripping and then as the
turn off system and it hasn't believed
on kind of pulling away doing that weird
concrete assets and if I expect the
right balance between weight times and
extrusion times I can actually end up
with perforations or little holes
between the drawers but maybe what I
like most about the system and again
it's coming back to this idea of
improvisation is that you you can you
can try it a lot of our faiths you can
do a little something here and then
change the timing of the rhythm
completely over here and your super
slowly build up variation and not
everything needs to be completely
hard-coded actually in the system you
could play with play with the delay and
then I started to try to scale this is
the mob and reimagine prototypical
architectural conditions like the
90-degree corner which is actually it's
a difficult to achieve with most
materials or difficult to achieve most
materials and all kind of forcing them
together and I always think to myself
why do we need to have 90-degree corners
everywhere when they're so difficult to
achieve and why do we need to force the
material and tip into this form that it
doesn't inherently want to take my own
sort of material purist sentiment that I
take to my work and the thing itself
kind of takes on a comic I think if you
try to make it do this it's like a
90-degree corner from like some planet
where there's a different gravitational
pull perhaps a planet moving didn't care
about 90 to be quite as much as we do
and for me it's important to entertain
the notion of this being a new quarter
detail or a new method of Bernard
agility and I think in general we've
become really accustomed to this to a
particular kind of aesthetic not just in
our digital work but in architecture in
general which is smooth and precise and
sometimes fairly but usually straight
and what I'm trying to explore are these
prototypes as an alternative
and I call this aesthetic a digital
object where precision is balance of
indeterminate on purpose and where it's
not completely clear who or what made
the thing in in other words where the
hand of the tool in the hand of the
maker both kind of disappeared and the
thing itself and now we just see this
kind of violent twisting and tearing of
concrete guts like the concrete is
almost trying to shake itself off and it
has a knife and a body of its own
argument does I think it's important to
explore this kind of abject aesthetic in
order to broaden the possibilities of
what can be delightful beautiful but
tripping also has some some fairly
constructive possibilities so for
example if you wait long enough you can
drop sequence that to form a column and
if you don't like long enough this is
what happens so we all know that we all
know that columns need reinforcement if
they're going to send up and we also
know that they need a certain
slenderness ratio in the cross-section
to the height so this actually led to my
current work which is you go to a shop
you see some of it which is the
development of I call incremental
piloting and solution or a 3d pie line
would be the subtitle for this project
but I'm a PC today
so three piping is a method for the
automated deposition of reinforced
concrete columns so I essentially have
taken that drip column that we just saw
and place it in a rebar cage so that I
can grow which is weird and I shot it
mainly because I do believe that
theoretical digit verification which
originates from this kind of absurdist
and even it's a oblique place can
actually inform speculation that results
into something and something that could
actually be the useful piece of
architecture now I think that there's
utility here but or utility to this
approach that said but tie-dye
admittedly chose to focus on what some I
think are less utility
aspects in my feeling is that learning
how to think in different ways is just
as useful as suddenly how to build a
column drives it really to me you can't
or shouldn't separate the two activities
so that's so maybe to briefly summarize
what theoretical just publications it
involves cultivating intuition about the
ways in which we work both as designers
and in his material box and then using
that information to design a theoretical
model of how digital publication
machines work and then speculate on the
aesthetic constructive and ethical
implications and so why do I think that
is necessary well because the complete
picture of the scene is this so we've
really become bystanders and fabrication
processes or maybe even worse in this
photo the thing in my hand is called at
each pendant you can on the teach
pendant there's a button called the
neighborhood search but I need to know
all about to in order for the robot to
run that literally makes me the
machine's enabled against some kind of
addiction to making that disease you
know turning a visit I step out of the
cage and close the door to let the
machine automatically autonomously
without me and I think neither scenario
is ideal because if nothing else the
material that were meant to be working
on or designing this is literally put
out of touch and I'd argument that of
mind so I think we need to find ways
into these processes not just to regain
or preserve our material namitha because
automation that seems like this are all
ready to be as reality we need to make a
case for why we're so needed and then
basically automating the world and we
need to be able to say white architects
are so valuable and I think are
evaluating this neckman on technological
moment is intuition so if we go back to
persons definition of intuition
superseded by which one is transported
into the interior of an object in order
to coincide
and consequently expensable and we can
infer that the wild birds in is
referring to here is a subject or a
living being no matter how intelligent
or learning machines become they will
always be objects and we in turn all
these subjects so in arguing you can
give a machine intelligence and you can
definitely give it a leak but you can't
give a machine intuition and if we take
this farther and think for a second
about what it means to call something
intuitive for example when we say that
something is welcomed into their machine
I think we take for granted that we
don't mean that the machine itself has
intuition but rather that the machine is
intuitive to use that we credibly
understand how to engage with it and
what it does and I would offer another
possibility that the idea of intuitive
machine can be a machine that helps us
cultivate our intuitions I think today
in particular we need to do this kind of
cultivation which is frankly hard work
because I've heard a lot of architects
say I know a lot I feel it in reference
to identifying a good and bad design I
know it what I see it in reference to a
pretty or not pretty thing which i think
is fine and we should be able to go off
our intuitions and the way things make
us feel but it's not enough I can't just
say I know when I feel that if you don't
have ways to precisely feel things and
so my research in a way is guided by
this idea of feeling precisely we also
clarify and say that I'm not against
technology and I'm not trying to declare
on the machines or suggest that we go
back to some time before robot sort of
thing instead my work is about finding
ways to sympathize as technologies to
evaluate them on our own terms and to
sense our intuitions through them it's
about finding ways into the interior of
the robot even when I can only stand
beside it and so I do that by trying to
figure out how to make this more like
this in other words by showing the
machine
[Applause]
you
[Applause]
