good evening to everyone and welcome to
the Balmer series my name is Eric Herman
I'm an assistant professor of
architecture here at the Knowlton School
and it's my privilege to introduce
tonight's speaker Sarah Dunn
Sarah Dunn is the co-founder of open lab
an architecture and urban design firm
she founded with Martin Felson
in 2005 Sarah is a professor in the
School of Architecture at the University
of Illinois at Chicago and she's lost a
ton of in studios at Columbia's t7r open
labs projects span and implicate many
scales from the from regional mega
proposals to residential projects and
exhibitions the Chicago based practices
work has received both national and
international recognition past honors
include first prize in the history
channel's the city of the future
competition and the and the American
Institute of architecture college of
fellows on the trove prize in 2010 the
architectural League of New York
included urban lab in their emerging
voices program urban lab is exhibited at
the Venice architecture Biennale in 2010
and 2012 and in Chicago's own
architecture Biennale in 2015 and 2017
the biennial I guess in Chicago urban
lab work is also in the collection of
the Art Institute of Chicago urban labs
visionary urban prototypes are
celebrated this fresh vibrant formerly
inventive and graphically delightful all
while remaining tethered to a precise
awareness of context
history and disciplinarity the practice
recently published holy water
architecture urbanism as a practice
system
the book offers a series of speculative
architectural projects centered around
the organizing role of water water like
architecture is often experiences
discrete as part of a continuous system
made incomprehensible but the sheer
planetary scale and complexity of its
systems the bowling project has broadly
quote why as a discipline to
contemporary architects countered huge
crises with small ideas urban lab
speculative work is framed further by
the reviewed frame of two hypotheticals
first why not architects and second what
if whereas a rhetorical question will
close a conversation just to make the
point the hypothetical opens it it asked
the audience to suspend disbelief
analysis responses as urban lab and does
the hypothetical could be a useful tool
to displace the focus of inquiry from
technical facts to cultural matters
hypotheticals are often rehearsed as
means for exploring possible futures but
they're equally helpful to reconsider
the shape of our past and perhaps the
symmetry points to Irvin labs the active
use of both history and future and their
projects their work definitely tackles
amongst many other issues the
infrastructural legacy of Burnham the
plan of Chicago's grid and the political
climates both past and present that were
repeatedly challenged by ecological
crises they build on techniques
introduced by past architects theorizing
responses to huge problems such as super
studio or the metabones
urban labs work is extensively
research-based but it doesn't offer
technocratic solutions instead
speculating on alternate scenarios with
prototypes for living marked by an
inventive language thoughtful planning
and considered implementation
importantly urban lab projects often
conflate disparate landscapes
technologies or programs that have been
compartmentalised or sequestered and
contemporary development patterns so in
this way urban labs
thinking's transgresses redirects
distant angles the literal and
metaphorical edges and binaries of the
contemporary metropolis the edges
cleaving local and global living and
working city environment land and water
urban and rural these edges are not only
contours that development patterns but
potential fault lines in other cultural
divides divides that urban lab works
overcome with architecture that's
suggesting wide styles that might help
us all more consciously and collectively
pursued a shared contemporary urban life
we are after all part of the water
constituency and for me this is the most
important and revelatory a lesson of
urban lab and it's holding that water
like architecture is ubiquitous medium
that binds us in ways that are both
entirely obvious and often completely I
expected please join me in warmly
welcoming Sarah Dunn as that's a thank
you to Eric that was a really nice
introduction and I really have nothing
more to add just kidding but yeah those
are that that was great thank you for
having me back
I actually was here in 2011 just now
quite a number of years ago it's very
nice to be back to talk about what both
the book and to talk about other work
that we're doing in the office I thought
I would kind of break the talk up into
two parts one is about really
theoretical projections of what as Eric
mentioned how we might reimagine how we
deal with landscape infrastructure
architecture in a new way around
water boarding maybe not new way but
around water and the other is kind of
the nitty gritty of of what else we do
when when the wheels hit the road and we
have an architectural practice and how
do we try to find connections between
the two of those things so as Eric
mentioned we I say just came out with
the boat but actually now it's about a
year and a half ago it took a really
long time and when I was looking at the
lecture that I gave here in 2011 some of
the projects are in it just took us a
really long time to organize it into a
book and I recommend if you ever do a
book don't write any essays just do
we're all really good at the at the
pictures writing is hard so the book
look speculates that we can hybridize
architecture infrastructure and
landscape and that these hybrids
combined with cultural desires because
as architects what we're good at is
articulating the cultural and marrying
that with the technical but that what is
what differentiates us from other
professions that deal with making the
built environment and together with the
hybrid combining hybrids and culture
desires we might actually stumble upon
design innovation our goals for all of
our projects actually for both projects
that we do tiny lobby renovations all
the way up to the design of cities is
always to produce new lifestyles and to
support existing lifestyles that we feel
might be under threat as well as create
new forms of collective association
which means new publics new public space
new ways to be together in architecture
we often look as our vention to the past
the recent past of groups like super
studio who were looking at the crises of
their time in the 50s 60s there was a
lot of worry about population growth
also there was worry about
sustainability and environmental
concerns those continued with us today
this is a project super stereo did when
Florence flooded in the 60s and they
made this collage about how do you how
would you deal in in this case kind of
critically with that flood they did
these crazy collages which really
inspire us to think in bigger ways then
then we might have before so also Penn
wide bowling actually another thing that
turns out to be really hard and doing a
book is the title it's really hard
actually
so why bowling it was sort of a struggle
of what we were actually doing we came
up with these rules and we realized that
everything we were doing this like
literally and it sounds really dumb and
it is dumb and one of our rules is
bowling is dumb number six
they were literally starting from the
idea of the watershed the watershed is
literally a kind of a bowl shape that
exists in nature which is organizing the
water systems of the world so we are
proposing a system
balls and making balls which is how we
come to the idea that we're bowling and
these bowls are cultural balls as well
as technical balls this is example that
we often use it's a project that we did
with Stanley tigerman a number of years
ago to give to the city to rethink some
of its issues and for example this is a
problem that we have at least a lot in
Chicago which is that we have just a lot
of empty space that was formerly dense
with neighborhood and it's now sort of
evacuated with with by by parking so
this is kind of the insidious creep of
parking that in our minds is devastating
a neighborhood there's other reasons why
this neighborhood is under stress but
one of them we posit is because the
United Center which is where our winter
sports teams play the Bulls and the
Blackhawks was so basketball and hockey
and they through overtime have basically
expanded their parking at the expense of
the surrounding neighborhood and what
you get is a huge amount of parking
it is a bowl of parking and our proposal
is to actually not not eliminate the
parking but give it a reverse growth
boundaries so that it like can't go any
further but that the neighborhood could
then start to kind of peel itself back
to this boundary and the boundary
proposed is a thickened zone that is not
so much wall but it's actually occupied
giant building made out of a Chicago
prototype called the three flat which is
sort of stacked together has figure
we're pretty interested in always kind
of indenting the kind of figural quality
to our projects aggregates together and
becomes a kind of almost sponge that
that rings the United Center parking
still stays there but the the
neighborhoods zone around it which is
currently currently empty
could face the could oops didn't work
throw itself back and this is a not
working maybe some problems with the
file but would grow itself back to to
the edge of that kind of sponge building
so that's how we get bowling and then we
also like bowling so bowling so the book
is organized into a number of chapters
the first half deals with process form
and organization the first half deals
with the the eastern side of the United
States and the second half deals with
the western side of the United States so
on the eastern side of the United States
east of the of the Mississippi River we
actually have the plenty of water in
most cases especially in the Great Lakes
region we have 20% of the Earth's fresh
water on deposit in the Great Lakes so
we don't have a problem of scarcity we
actually have a problem of stewardship
and in the west side of the United
States we have a problem of scarcity so
we break this into what you do with a
lot of water what you do with not enough
water and how do you do it in such a way
that you
not only kind of solve technical issues
which other people other professions can
solve just as well but how do you
leverage that into creating new possible
public's new ways to live so how do you
make it a cultural project and bowling
does a number of things makes bowls
forms figures and also organizes
programs and services like here's a ball
example I just go through we have lots
of writing which took way too long
oh this is an interesting example of
what you do when you when you do when
you don't manage your resources well
this is the Aral Sea which is in the
former Soviet Union in Kazakhstan in
which engineers and politicians at the
time of the USSR decided to favour
agriculture over fishing and diverted
water from the Aral Sea and so it
depletes very quickly fourth largest
body of water in the world and now is no
longer you could see the brackish water
and the fact of kind of extreme
devastation which you don't have to be a
scientist to kind of see and that's what
happens when water systems are not taken
care of now the
have these big storms of sand but what
you could look at is a kind of more
positive intervention is what happened
in Ascension Island from 1835 when
Darwin and his ship landed in the island
and turned actually through kind of
productive insertion of new plant
species turned what was a kind of desert
island into a tropical paradise so we've
been designing our landscapes and our
environments for quite a long time so we
have to be obviously very careful in how
we do it but sometimes we can actually
do something right and so this has gone
from something that was formerly barren
to something super lush what he did was
with some associates brought in a series
of different types of plants and planted
them at different elevations and they
kind of took over and it goes from again
a desert to a lush landscape so we don't
propose this extreme amount of
intervention and our projects are very
theoretical and we're not expecting them
to actually happen but what we are
interested in is furthering the
conversation to think about what is what
if we did rearrange the city in a
different way so projects that this one
is about Chicago and the various areas
in Chicago which are losing many
manufacturing jobs we propose to make a
free Water District in these areas and
propose that other cities around the
Great Lakes could do the same and almost
make it kind of the new system
where companies could come to the city
in these free water districts set up
shop use as much water as they want
which is pretty controversial but they
would be responsible for restoring the
segregated landscapes that exist there
now the brownfields that are left after
our Industrial Revolution and to clean
any water that they don't use and put it
back into the Great Lakes so this is
like a project that actually started
through a competition kept going who is
of interest to one of our previous
mayors and lives aren't as a kind of
idea that can be thought about and we
think about it actually in our practice
even though if this is a theoretical
project we think about it in our
practice as a kind of real thing this is
actually exhibited the 2012 Venice
Biennale and so again this particular
bowl is both the kind of technical ball
and that it organizes water but also a
kind of cultural Bowl in that it also
organizes new social systems and
introduces new possibilities for how to
live in Chicago so this particular
section is cutting through a proposal
that would happen in the center of Steve
of the project which would be this new
Rd University that would kind of
organize all these new manufacturing
plants around it and would provide jobs
and training for the neighborhood and so
this is kind of maybe what it might look
like afterwards we're always interested
at figure figure and field sometimes
what we're producing is at the scale of
a city and it might be a figure and
there
skill they you zoom in it's at the scale
of field and then again the figures up
close this project started the whole
thing in which we thought about how
currently Chicago takes its water out of
Lake Michigan it does not put it back
we're the only city on the Great Lakes
that takes water out and doesn't put it
back we actually put it into a whole
different watershed and in in the
Mississippi watershed it ends up as part
of the problem flowing into the Gulf of
Mexico with all the pollutants that are
flowing and creating these issues in New
Orleans so a long time ago hundred years
ago in Chicago we actually kind of made
a cut we actually reorganized the bowl
system and we connected ourselves as a
link between the Great Lakes watershed
and the Mississippi watershed and this
is the main reason for Chicago's success
is that in fact you can for example ship
something from New York down to New
Orleans and it will go through Chicago
and Chicago will somehow benefit from
that so that actually was the economic
generator a driver of Chicago for still
but the side effects that it produced
are extreme so we're pulling out gallons
and millions of gallons of water every
day and we're not putting them back and
so we're our proposal is actually to use
the organization of the city itself to
collect that water clean it and put it
back into the Great Lakes so much of the
water that's pulled out is used for a
variety of purposes our city is
organized on a grid we propose to
actually use the grid to take water
that's used and then
and put it back into the Great Lakes so
every east west street every half mile
as an east-west street would become a
Boulevard by which we could transport
clean water back to the Great Lakes
these are you know it's pretty extreme
to propose to Chicago to replumb the
whole city so obviously we had to
rethink but the idea is here come up in
future projects which I'll get to and go
a little bit faster but this is a kind
of street before and a street after on
the right side street before being an
equal Boulevard and a street after and
you can see in the Eco Boulevard the
street is still functional as a street
there's there's less there's less lanes
and the parking is different but there's
ways to kind of collect rainwater and
storm water and collect actually waste
water and clean it and slowly put it
back into the lake and how it might
affect how we live in the city every
Chicagoan would that now be only a
quarter of a mile from a amenity that is
connected to the lakefront
so in Chicago right now people who are
who live close to the lakefront have a
lot of amenity in that they have a
beautiful landscape but there's many
people who actually can't are not are
very disconnected from the lake this is
basically drawing the lake amenity
through the city at every half mile so
you're only about 10 minutes walk from
this amenity so it's a project that's
trying to be a little more in a latarian
about our resources and so after that we
started thinking about well
replumb the whole city maybe can plumb
little parts of it we started thinking
much more micro little elements that
could be popped into a couple of parking
spots and would propose to actually
clean the wastewater of a kind of a
single block and so this you could do
incrementally over time a lot less of a
big big infrastructure
but always we're interested in
leveraging the interest the investment
into infrastructure with the investment
into the cultural so each one of these
is also something else it's a bike
station or bus stop or even potentially
a swimming pool which let me get to that
which with all the clean water that you
have in excess could become something
that you have never had in the city
before a little swimming pool on your
block and these would be cultural
markers there'd be little figures in the
neighborhood and sort of go throughout
the neighborhood as a way of kind of
signifying where you are and they were
hood so we also started thinking about
our extreme rain events that happen now
they're supposed to happen once every
hundred years but the 100-year rainfalls
seem to happen with much more frequency
at this point and there's you know
obviously speculation as to why
currently we take all of our storm
events and we have we house it here in
this giant hole
Hertz and it's pretty cool but but it's
a hole in the summers and that's could
be so much more but it's pretty cool
so we propose to actually take that
infrastructural investment and to
reorganize it and put it actually not in
the suburbs which is not where the
problem is but in the center of the city
at the mouth of the Chicago River and
other rivers in the in the region in
order to when the city has a big rain
event we 100 years ago as I just said we
take all the water we collected and we
put it down to Mississippi River
eventually but when we have a giant rain
we can't actually process the water fast
enough so often what we do is we just
dump it into the river and so then we
get really gross stuff in the river and
then when the river too gets really full
we actually open the locks and send that
river into the Great Lakes into Lake
Michigan which is really bad because
that's also where we get a fresh water
so we proposed in the kind of Birnam
esque manner and I'm not sure if you
know about
Burnham's ideas for Chicago the 1909
plan in which he proposed and this is
the kind of result over here on the Left
reorganization he didn't only invent the
lake front and the kind of those are
amenity that it is but actually he was
proposing transportation infrastructure
changes water infrastructure changes
very many different things that actually
don't really get thought about what
really gets thought about when people
say the burning plan is is is the kind
of physical park that is the sort of
center of the city so you're proposing
at the
scale of the burning plan to to think
about how we could take water and clean
it before it gets dumped into Lake
Michigan so that very large rain events
hmm okay there's a plan it's not showing
up but anyway
see mm okay I have to take my word for
it
the city would collect all its water
rather than in the suburbs here clean it
and then put it into the lake and in the
kind of cleaning landscape would also be
all these cultural programs from state
park to our museum to wetland
bird-watching sanctuary to concert venue
and these would be kind of integrated
within the landscape of daughter
cleaning okay we did this model actually
for the first Chicago which is I think
the only way I'm going to be able to
show you what it looks like because my
plans are showing up but it is this very
figural thing which takes on qualities
from the Burnham plan and repositions
them in order to make a new public
amenity that is both doing a technical
thing but at the same time bringing
people together in public space and this
is some images of close-up what these
that's pretty abstract those little
cones are trees and the crazy gradient
things are our architecture it's not
yeah anyway
and the landscape and then blue is
obviously water and then this is at the
mouth of where the water is at this
point and goes into Lake Michigan here
also this is during a rainy moment where
the park is filling up with water and it
will be cleaned and then this is a kind
of moment where it's drier it's not
raining anymore so you see the very
impaired and beyond and you see this
kind of Birnam part to that we're
proposing and then as I said the second
half of the book is about Death Valley
and the Southwest and it's even more
crazy than the first half and we propose
to think very seriously about water
shortages and sea level rise and think
about what could you do if you actually
flooded Death Valley and we're not
really proposing to flood that's
valuable posing to think about what if
you did what if you thought about
different ways to live in the southwest
living perhaps more communally and
living in a way that collects water into
these depressions which exist in the
southwest that can't hold water could
you then imagine new ways to live and
have a kind of excess of water which the
Southwest has never had so it entails
designing an aqueduct which would pull
water from Baja California and pull it
up into the valley that into Death
Valley
and be both the technical thing of
bringing water and desalinating it but
also be a place for living together and
again we're pulling this is our collage
this is super studio
we're totally ripping them off but
they're ok with it
I got it in writing but so so what can
you how can you productively engage with
the crisis of the environment that we
have right now what can you think about
actually this is a model that we made
for the Chicago biennial in 2017 in
which we're looking at kind of the
elements of super studio elements and
our elements in which we propose this
aqueduct that you can live on and under
and above and it was super popular on
Instagram which was also one of our
goals
and so this is the different ways that
you could live with this aqueduct and
this is the kind of flooded Death Valley
so this is all now fresh water we looked
at town morphologies and how could you
create a new type of town this is our
version of town so you see the aqueduct
going through and you see these
basically town houses which all kind of
talk together and of course it's super
hot there and shade is actually where
you want to kind of do public space so
this is a diagram with all the shaded
public space that would be available in
this new town here's the aqueduct going
through it and we made all these
drawings we also designed all of these
housing elements which are shown in
orthographic projection up here so we
designed all of these kind of tiny
little elements that come together and
make this town and then projected how
you might kind of exist in these spaces
and living mostly in the shade because
it's really hot how you might do in a
more urban scale aggregation of living
above living above and below the
aqueduct and thinking about again the
kind of housing elements and different
programs and how they fit together
and this is kind of some of the work in
the book that we look at in how they
design for the extreme climate one side
of north
the other side south-facing so one side
is in Shea is shaded and the other side
doesn't necessarily have to be so much
again sort of inventing all of the
housing elements that might fit together
to to provide enough places to live and
ways to live or one bedrooms two
bedrooms condos hotels old folks homes
all sorts of things and how that kind of
aggregates together to form a new urban
scale figure and this is another drawing
that we made of that so again we're
really super interested in that kind of
public zone in the middle and then we
also looked at the suburb and how could
you productively marry aquaculture with
the suburb in this situation and produce
these suburbs that are both places to
live they're also places to work and the
ground plan is where you are harvesting
a variety of aquaculture based systems
and then above the second level how
you're living kind of above that in
forming a kind of map building looking
both above and below so the bottom part
of the drawing is kind of a worms eye
and the top is a top down and always
interested in how these elements kind of
work together and so you would get this
kind of giant not building that's
actually in the experience of it would
still be pretty suburban and then and we
thought an interesting way and this is
how you might live in that suburb kind
of like John Wayne out in the desert
lots of water so that's that's kind of
one part of our project and I'm gonna
switch to the other part which is what
we also do and so we work so you do that
work we're always doing that work
sometimes it's solicited often it starts
as a solicited thing and then the good
thing is over like it was a competition
the competition ends and we keep going
and we keep kind of thinking about it
and working it so many of those projects
started as either a competition or some
kind of workshop of some sort and
sometimes they just we invented them
completely on our own but then they
start to inform some of the projects in
the office even the very small ones I
think maybe not so directly but but
indirectly so I'm gonna start the kind
of projects that we actually do in the
office that are sort of we sort of do
approach all the projects in the same
way so even though I split the projects
in half in this lecture we approach them
the same way and so even on a something
as small as a house we're still
interested in new possibilities or and
you can argue how new are some of these
possibilities but trying to engage in
the cultural project of architecture by
looking
both past backwards and how other
architects were inventing new ways to
live and projecting with this knowledge
forward always in search of what is the
kind of lifestyle ramification of that
so this is a project that when I looked
at our that I looked at the lecture from
eight years ago I showed this house so
this is one of our longest-running
projects it's actually a house for my
brother so that's why it's taking a long
time
and if you actually list in it now but
still not time so this is a rendering of
it this is what it's supposed to look
like but it doesn't quite look like that
yet so this house is at a an interesting
on a on the hillside it's LA so it's
very hilly in parts and it has like two
beautiful views one to the Hollywood
sign which is you know the classic la
view and one to the mountains which are
also super beautiful and our initial
idea in the idea that we kind of pushed
all the way through is to kind of tweak
the understanding of the landscape and
to kind of embed a living a private kind
of bar of living into the landscape or
at least make it feel like that and then
underneath that have what we think of is
kind of a more publicly oriented group
space like the living space underneath
that and to do those two things within a
budget and for a family client and and
then have that person my brother be the
GC and he's not a GC so so it's a little
bit tricky and that's why it takes a
long time but this is the kind of
diagram the model that is kind of what
we were going for and
sort of the normal things in the house
of a living space a garage living spaces
bedroom spaces and then how it kind of
fits into the landscape this is what we
want it to look like this is kind of
what it looks like right now it doesn't
really quite have the facade on it so
I'm gonna keep going so you don't see
that but this is what it currently looks
like and so it's just down to the last
tool at the skin on the upper level
which is trying to kind of do something
of holding the whole thing together but
so I think in this project you kind of
see our approach to architecture at the
small scale how we try to organize
architecture with landscape and not
necessarily infrastructure in this case
but the that we're trying always even at
the small scale and I've here whited out
all the elevations that I don't like so
it looks it doesn't exactly look like
this but someday it will look a lot
better but this is what it and the photo
is kind of blowing out and can't see the
Hollywood sign but take my word for it
it's over there
and
the hills are kind of around the side so
this is kind of maybe in a super small
scale what we're thinking about at at a
purely architectural scale it's some day
that won't be white it out and then sort
of going up in scale so these are all
sort of going up in scale the brick
house that we did in Chicago also
constraining sort of a project in that
it's a it's a large house and made even
larger by the fact that all the houses
next door to it are very small but how
again sort of can we organize landscape
together with architecture so that you
get this possibility of living both with
landscape and with architecture in here
kind of lowest level of peeling up to
become a a hill we actually hired
because our own house in office we
created a hill and the clients are Hill
and decided they wanted one too and so
we made loop them on and this I think I
have a photo we had we got to have fun
with brick and it was trying to kind of
dematerialization
but here you see the landscape that's
kind of coming into the into the house
there's also a landscape carved out from
one top this is a courtyard at the top
level of the house and here's the hill
that highs the cracking garage
underneath and then produces a kind of
play space for the kids and
dematerializing even into the stair so
we have this kind of perforated metal
stair
folds all the way up to the top floor
and it's a little bit scary when you are
on the top looking down so that leads us
to this house which is actually in
construction right now which is a
smaller more modest version of that and
trying to kind of again look at how we
can live in kind of new ways in the city
it takes the typical Chicago house and
just kind of messes around with it a
little bit typically about a house is
kind of maxed out there would be no
removals but we convince the client to
make this kind of courtyard on the
second level and push the first level
back and carve out the bottom level so
that we could just make a few tweaks in
order in the normal course of Chicago
architecture in order to try to make
this house a little bit different a
little bit more with more possibilities
of living in the spaces let's get this
so it's in construction now I think they
just did the installation today so I
don't have any footage of that
eventually these will give way to
something finished here's a much smaller
version of kind of connecting the
landscape at the back the house we are
interested also and just kind of very
banal Chicago views that you get in
Chicago when you look sideways most of
the time houses are organized in the
narrow front and the narrow back to kind
of look either at a really kind of ugly
alley or at a pretty nice street but
we're pretty interested in the side
views that are usually not considered so
we're looking at that and then and this
is a renovation of an existing building
so sort of getting larger and scale and
in this one also looking at the
possibilities of both living and working
here that clients were interested in
having the perfect and in fact this
gallery is actually golden section so
they were really interested in a kind of
perfectness of it and then smaller
galleries but what we spent a lot of
time with them was on the kind of
private space in the kind of living
space and how can you make a gallery
also feel welcoming and cozy even though
it's pretty neutral and cold so
designing in that way sort of thinking
about how you spend your whole workweek
here how do you almost live in it to the
point where the the private offices in
the back are modeled after a kind of a
living room type of space and this is
that space and then kind of back of
house also right now we're doing another
building for some not the same kind of
client this is a landscape company that
does their what they do is they pretty
much do all the green roofs in Chicago
and we met them because they did our
green roof and and we've been friends
ever since and so they wanted a very
green like literally green building and
their company is called intrinsic and so
they they got this building and we're
doing an extreme renovation of it and
they are basically they want to showcase
their work but we don't want it to seem
very show KC we wanted to see much more
organic but this is in construction
right now and the kind of interesting
thing about it maybe is that the space
while kind of big and varied this very
big could become intimate and produce
interesting views throughout with a few
moments tweaking here and there and
produce potentially interesting
architectural effects and this is
actually the first type of corners we
built which is for group called Upton's
naturals they make vegan meat
replacement stuff and it's pretty
interesting and they're probably in your
local supermarket at this point when we
met them they were much smaller and they
were working in one place living in
another place and they wanted to kind of
pull everything together and so this is
kind of a study and how can you in with
a very very modest budget and a lot of
program to squeeze into a tight space
can you actually play around with any
kind of fear of quality with a super
low-tech strategy of precast panels and
so the kind of one move of shifting the
panels up in one portion in order to
invite the public in in this case to a
new cafe that they started just for this
location but at the same time most of
their work should be private because
they have you know it's not pretty
putting this stuff together so the first
level is cafe and food processing plant
the second level is storage and office
then the third level is apartment and
yoga studio and it's all and eight
thousand five hundred square feet which
is really not that much when you would
put all those things together so it's
almost like a three dimensional sort of
Tetris puzzle that fits together and
somehow works and what we this is the
cafe off
processing their apartment at the top
floor and their space for entertaining
they they have events and their yoga
studio this is their yoga studio which
also kind of has to function separately
from everything else so it's complex but
in the end sitting all together and
doing some technical things but really
we're not there yet so getting larger
and scale still this is a project that
we did together with Kelly bear and some
other faculty at UIC for a new campus
Performing Arts Building which is a
couple years ago is now kind of morphed
into a different project that OMA New
York is doing but this was our thinking
for it before it became a separate thing
but to take the campus and kind of
invert it into a building that could
change over time potentially depending
on building horizon and budget
so we've started with this idea and this
is starting to kind of get closer to
maybe a relationship between our
completely theoretical work in the book
and trying to kind of pull that into a
real project then we start with these
elements that we design these elements
to each to have its own identity and
then we play with how they aggregate
together and how they can both produce a
figure and a field both in plan and
section so playing around with these
these ideas and but also trying to fit
three hundred thousand square feet of
program into the project for to think
about how two different faculties would
come together a visual arts faculty and
a music and theater faculty which don't
necessarily want to be together actually
and you know in academia sometimes
people don't really want to hang out
together but how could you actually
produce both space that would make it
convivial to kind of interact but also
to have disciplinary kind of depth and
section so you could do your own thing
and actually produce silos on purpose
but then with the public space at the
ground floor so that you could you could
actually get both so it sits in the on
the edge of the campus it wants to do
everything for everybody all the time
like all clients it has to function with
these four very specific performing
venues and then also allow the artists
to have their proper space to do their
work and this is our we'd like to make
these dumb little
that are funny and these to us
I think it goes backwards to their good
anyway so when you cut the section
through the building this invariably one
at least one courtyard which brings
light and air and visual release relief
from deep into the building which is a
matte building but kind of a matte
feeling because it's three stories tall
the most map buildings are not that tall
so it's a kind of combination of a
number of things and looking at that and
then looking at how its it lives in the
world it's right next to the highway so
it becomes a symbol or Cygnus a sign for
the university that something new is
possibly happening and then how does it
kind of live those on the street at
night it changes with these fins that
have glass behind them so at night you
kind of read the interior more then
during the day when it seems a little
more okay I'm in figuring out the kind
of entry sequences and lobby spaces
because it should function both kind of
for high culture and then also just
everyday down-and-dirty making things so
that kind of I think I could tie a
direct connection between its where the
United Center work and some of the death
valley work into this project getting
kind of more larger and larger this is a
basically a playground we call an
outdoor learning center because it's for
a school that's really interested in
using play as part of pedagogy we did
lots of research with the with the
faculty and the board and it's really
interesting there's direct correlation
between play time and how children's
minds develop how their brains develop
and crazy relationships between hanging
upside down and like math skills or
doing climbing and maybe more obviously
building up self-confidence and so part
of the problem with playgrounds today is
that they're they are very safe and they
feel very safe but we wanted to design a
playground that was safe but felt unsafe
because actually in our research and
it's actually true children should
actually be challenged and feel like
there's something at risk even though
there might not actually be anything at
risk they need to feel like there is in
order to help their development
that thing on the floor is not a kid
so this landscape this is a resilient
landscape that has quite a bit of
recycled rubber on it so that you can
actually fall from the 10th 10 feet up
and be okay and so maybe this is a kind
of microcosm of some of our ideas for
the free water district we had this
landscape that would collect water and
also allow people to gather so this is a
kind of super micro level a landscape
that both has something kind of floating
above it and that you could actually
create a new space for gathering and I
showed the amphitheater beyond which is
which is literally a gathering space and
it's been very successful kids love it
so that's good and the rest of it is
also thought about this is the kind of
nature area for the smaller kids to play
with sand and water and at their speed
but this is a very small school so kids
are kind of all together the big kids
with eighth grade down to the three year
old so there needed to be some zones but
there's new walls in between it so
everyone saw there's a three year old
that decides that he or she wants to
kind of climb the net which is not a
good idea so they pull the kid off and
then over on the left is a farm that
the time of this drawing wasn't fear
doubt and a field in the middle which is
kind of normal and this leads to
actually the work we're doing with them
now which is to kind of think about the
building itself so we're thinking about
a gymnasium for them and a library and a
kind of new art wing that again kind of
pulling together this idea of figure and
feel trying to think about how these
things might live together in both the
existing space and by themselves so
those are kind of just little not that's
not a gift that's just me this is a
project that unfortunately is on
permanent fold but I still like it and I
feel like it fits within the kind of
narrative of of going from small to big
it is a for another academic client this
is the school their Institute in Chicago
and it is this building is right next to
the school and right next to the Art
Institute but it you've never actually
noticed this building it's designed by
Walter niche and it has seen better days
it needs to kind of be the landscape in
front of it needs to be rethought so
that the kind of beauty of the building
which is pretty severe and an acquired
taste can be reappraising so the
schoolyard suit has no public space for
its students it's a very you know it's
in in the loop in Chicago and there's no
public spit outdoor space for it so we
were commissioned to rethink the space
in front of
or in school they're interested building
at this corner and think about how we
could take the existing Plaza and
reorganize it so that it could do more
than the a lot of trees that are
obscuring the building and so we got
about this landscape which is very
related to the landscape but a bit
bigger from the school that we just that
I just showed of the playground and how
it could activate the space but also
kind of make a separation between the
city and the school so we introduced
these these mounds which underneath our
tiny galleries for the school's students
to display their work in but on the
other side produce these stepped
landscapes that you can both hang out on
and then maybe also do different types
of programs they have a fashion
department that has a very significant
fashion show once a year so that could
happen here they have musicians they
could play here as well there's
different things that could happen it
could also be sculpture that's displayed
in different types of art so this sort
of would kind of direct relationship
with the playgrounds but at a larger
scale and again kind of pulling from the
work that we're doing and the other part
of our work which is the more
theoretical this ism
that we made that shows the how the
landscape both provides the kind of
separation from the this is totally not
working oh yeah
no anyway from the street to the
building to create this third space
that's both sort of separate and part of
the part of the school and part of the
city it's a very deep space so we have
we're thinking about how you kind of
perceive it as you go by this is
actually changing it's not your eyes but
sort of focusing deep into the space and
also at the surface so another thing
that we have currently in construction
that we're working with Epstein which is
a very large architecture engineering
firm around the world but with the big
office in Chicago is a bridge that we
are teamed with found because of our
kind of interest in water this river is
part of the Chicago River system it is
on the north side of the city
here the city was thinking about
connecting with this yellow line on the
left this is the city's proposal of
connecting a pedestrian path on one side
of the river to a pedestrian path on the
other side and they were going to need
to do some eminent domain and basically
take some landscape of bison landscape a
River Edge from neighbors either side
and also create a very hard edge to the
river in doing that and we proposed that
actually based on research and
studies that we did together with
Epstein then in fact if we pulled a path
from the edge of the river they wouldn't
have to eminent domain the neighbors and
they could actually save the soft edge
of the river by pulling the path into
the river and so this is a series of
sections which show how we fold the path
into the river and kind of wind it along
the river and so that we don't have to
impact negatively the neighbors but also
produce a healthier River because the
soft edge is healthier condition than a
hard edge would be there's a little bit
of hard edge this is how it should look
when it's done it goes to the river and
this is it in construction so you can
see they kind of pulled some earth over
in order to kind of do the construction
but then that would be removed
afterwards and there's some kind of edge
condition hard edge condition but
further along this is sort of a couple
weeks ago it is fully in the river and
not impacting the edge so that is a kind
of positive development so these ideas
that kind of get played out and once
somehow show up in another skill and
then for our biggest skill we're looking
at cities in China where they're
actually doing kind of really
large-scale work so we can actually
propose some of the ideas that we were
thinking about in the book at a large
scale so this is a project in in Hunan
Province the site area is the paint on
the right there's a very historic old
city along a river that eventually ends
in the Yangtze River and this river
regularly floods the area that's
outlined in the site there's an existing
kind of compromised sort of late-ish
thing which we wanted to reorganize and
the size of it is comparing to Chicago
this is the center of the city and
Chicago's that's a scale there we are
here actually testing our idea of the
Eco Boulevard which we proposed
originally for the city of Chicago and
for the city of Chicago it's too much to
to think about but when you're kind of
making a doubling size your city in a
couple of years it seems to make sense
for for this city in China and so here
this is a diagram of basically using the
Eco Boulevard Eco Boulevard idea and a
new refigured lake in the center to
collect stormwater clean it and put it
into this lake and then actually ask the
river can handle it it still needs to
get pumped into the river but there was
no way around kind of that portion of it
but this is a kind of maybe direct most
direct relationship between the early
the research I showed at the beginning
and kind of what we can do with it and
so we refigure the lake for cultural
reasons as well as technical reasons and
make the series of islands which this is
kind of overview of it there's like
eight neighborhoods designing an urban
scale we're not doing the actual
architecture of it unfortunately but
maybe someday but so where we're
proposing and they're implementing this
slowly now this idea of the lake is a
cultural idea not only a technical thing
but that it's a place for collecting
people and advance an architecture and
landscape together in order to see what
interesting possibilities can shake out
and then the left is a section of one of
the Eco boulevards so that basically all
the water that falls in the zone can be
passively collected and mostly passively
cleaned and then not passively pumped up
but eventually into the into the lake
and then pumped into the river to keep
going out of the region so this is
actually the Eco Boulevard on the left
kind of in a dry condition and then the
when it's raining and collecting
stormwater so we've designed an urban
like an urban design scale in different
neighborhoods in order to produce
difference throughout the city so it
could be successful central business
district a kind of exhibit district
everybody needs a Soho these days so
kind of Soho district and Rd districts
various types of neighborhood districts
Logistics district and in a kind of
civic district and the favorite one for
us is the cultural district which is a
series of islands that have cute
architecture on them that would be
museums and theaters and a variety of
places to go and spend your time we've
looked at kind of important views and
this is a kind of diorama made to prove
to the client that you would get a
really nice view of a significant
mountain in the distance the Eco
Boulevard is now manifest as basically
anything that you see that's orange is
eco Boulevard different looking at
different ways to produce we design idea
for shopping district neighborhood
shopping districts I basically just do
all of this in two months so we did that
with a fast
this is the cultural district Soho oh
yeah I'm going right way the kind of
expo district more cultural districts
so that led to another project in China
this one is I think part this is the one
that's part of the rejected show is that
still here okay
yeah so this will be one the last one we
didn't really win this one so it was
rejected but a smaller city close by
with even more water wants to develop
further and this one had a series of
really important wetlands that we wanted
to really be respectful of and how do
you do this real desire to develop
smartly and so that you don't devastate
the environment and so we looked at this
as creating both a way to develop but
also a way to sustainably develop in
that you could think about what are the
what what in your city what do you want
to favor over other things so in this
case favoring kind of a water based
economy they ended up wanting to favor a
sports based economy so the supports
guys won whatever so we this is much
bigger than the last one so maybe harder
to kind of drill down but looking at
looking at so we also I don't know if
you know Bertrand Goldberg but he was a
very important architect in Chicago and
sort of riffing on his architecture for
the architecture of the city and making
kind of different precincts and
different ways to in here
we're addressing a very soft edge but
we're not manipulating the edge this is
the existing edge and we don't want to
manipulate it because we don't want to
mess it up
so we're kind of setting our insertions
back from the edge of the of the water
as much as we can and this different
precincts again cultural precinct expo
precinct here's the thing that we
exhibited here at the rejected show
which is a little water tank plus
restaurant in the middle of a kind of
economic district and residential
districts that are tucked into these
this really interesting ecology that we
didn't want to mess up this is the
drawing that is submitted to your shelf
which is the little water tank with
restaurant on top so again this one
draws from our one of the projects in
Bolingbrook which was the kind of little
micro building that cleans water and
also it's a program so at the super
small scale and then the biggest project
that we are doing recently is rethinking
the Chicagoland area for 2050 we were
commissioned by this Chicago
metropolitan agency for planning to take
to look at the region with them they
produce every every 10 years they
produce a paper a white paper that is in
this case 600 pages long and it looks
like this it's a lot of text a lot of
text and we work together with them to
visualize what this means it took two
years because there's a lot of text
but to think about what Chicago is now
and then project based on their research
and our thinking about the way that
could be architecture alized to what
chicago and its environment its environs
could be in 2050 so there's lots of
thinking about transportation different
modes of transportation it's there were
three main ideas that they wanted to
work from to do much more equitable
distribution of investment so they would
prioritize investment into areas that
had not previously had enough investment
in the previous plans and then we
invented the form the architectural
ization of it of these ideas and work
back and forth with them so all of the
ideas that we are working on in these
images are reflecting their research
policies and so it's it's a lot this is
kind of it changing over time there's
also ideas and ideas about investment
over time so you can't change everything
once so we're looking also at how stuff
develops over time and thinking about
that type of thing for them and it's now
their policy it's part of their policy
for the 2050
goal and now we're actually working with
them on rethinking the highway system in
the region and that's also going to take
like a year
so you can see it would take a really
long time to explain every one of these
images oh so I won't but that work
really comes from again kind of the
research that we're doing and then here
I just thought I would show you a couple
of really almost done I'm sure that
you're exhausted but some things that
we're doing right now which again kind
of going back in scale a concours for
our favorite Chicago one of our favorite
Chicago architects can't say only
Bertrand Goldberg his most famous
project in the city is the marina city
also known as the corncob buildings but
looking at this kind of Flint area that
you don't really sort of remember in the
diagram but it's got this public space
and we're trying to reorganize it for
both the residential tenants and the
commercial tenants and produce a kind of
public space for them that currently is
is really barren and not very fun to
hang out in and to kind of open it up in
order to have these out and also to
introduce a Bertrand Goldberg Center for
the city which it surprisingly doesn't
have right now another project we're
doing for a chain restaurant in the u.s.
inventing a prototype for them based on
a lot of research of how they currently
function and and maybe how they might
function in the future and how they
might appeal to people that they don't
currently appeal to we're also working
with some with a startup she developed a
kid house everybody's into prefab
trying we'll see how it goes we are also
doing trying to self develop two houses
ourselves which is going pretty slowly
this is on the Chicago's version of the
High Line which is not as fancy but much
longer than the High Line way less fancy
like it's basically a sidewalk elevated
but the site is right next to it
and so we're thinking about how do you
build right next to it so that you could
actually produce an effect to the public
out of some very private things which
are houses so these are not open to the
public that they might along the 606 do
something in a public way that might be
interesting we're also looking for debt
with a developer for an addition to an
existing building actually rebuilding an
existing building and the Gold Coast to
produce basically doubling the size of
the building by rebuilding it with a
little Tower it's in showing we're
showing it here as pink we'll see how
long we can get away with that but
thinking about that and then as I
mentioned before we're also looking at
the
highway system in Chicago with with CMAP
and thinking about that in the next
couple year or so with them yeah so
thank you very much sorry that was a lot
[Applause]
[Music]
even
some of the big projects yeah so my
question is remain optimistic well yeah
that's a good question I think we remain
optimistic I think because I think you
need to try to be as optimistic as
possible in order to engage these issues
you know it's we're not always
optimistic but we feel that the kind of
optimism of the of the idea I don't know
we kind of get attached to the
possibility of actually doing something
rather than giving up that could
actually productively make an adjustment
so maybe you know to take as reference
the Darwin project rather than the
Soviet project
that we could maybe do some of these
projects at some scale that that would
actually lead to both addressing the
issue but also be super productive for
the cultural possibilities I don't know
how we remain optimistic I'm not sure I
probably would have to get analyzed but
I think that it's a good question
because the super studio was not necess
t'k about it and in here directly
referencing them they're critical
we're also critical they were not that
optimistic we are optimistic so we
understand that that's that we have a
kind of different idea of like how to
activate the ideas but that maybe maybe
we just have to be different in order to
move forward then because otherwise we'd
just be doing exactly the same thing
I don't think that answered your
question but I'm not sure I know any
other questions yeah
uh-huh
no we're actually proposing to actively
flood it but not really proposing to
actively flood it because I know people
who live in Palm Springs and they're
like no no so it's a again a kind of
would--if question like what if you did
that
maybe that because actually Death Valley
is a type of Basin that used to have
water in it so it's not something that
never had water in it it doesn't have
water in it now but it did have water in
it many many many many many years ago so
it kind of perfect for holding water and
it could produce these kind of really
amazing micro climates and it could be
really cool of course it's crazy a crazy
idea but by playing the idea out maybe
we can have ideas for more realistic
projects
Thanks yeah
our graphic approach and then second
part
oh how we look like how we actually do
it
well we very purposely take graphic
approach and we write about it in the
book that we are kind of like influenced
not only by super studio and art kazoom
and ARCA gram but also like Murakami and
cute
the idea of cute and that is a kind of
way that we think that we could be that
we could do kind of radical idea that
might be familiar enough to be accepted
by a larger group of people
that it could that that that's why we
that's one of the reasons we're
interested also we're just interested in
that kind of design work the way we do
it is like everybody just like a lot of
trial and error I guess just trying
stuff
yeah so it's it's kind of developed and
we work things and then rework them and
so we do it kind of through an iterative
process
okay all right thank you very much
[Applause]
