thank you Mike hello my name is Tyson
massacres I'm an assistant professor and
senior regional planning here in the
Milton school and it's night it is my
pleasure to introduce our speaker
Michael Seth Wexler coming to us from
the Copenhagen eyes design company for
those of you who don't know me and are
regulars to the Ballmer lecture series I
am NOT Curtis Roth and I cannot act
eloquently about things like the
slippery and slightly transgressive
nature of the letter X
unfortunately Curtis I still think about
the letter X since you use it to your
intro I do however I want to take a few
minutes to contextualize a relationship
between Copenhagen eyes the city and
regional planning program here at the
Milton school and Michael our speaker
for tonight
so every year or released many years our
professor Laura from City Regional
Planning visits Copenhagen as part of
his May study abroad trip and as a part
of that visit he also attends or goes to
Copenhagen eyes headquarters so as a
result of that emerging relationship we
thought it was important to to bring the
firm here to all of us in in central
Ohio but having said that and giving you
a bit of context for the importance of
that relationship you might realize for
those of you that know me then it's a
little awkward for me to stand up here
and sort of argue for Copenhagen as the
world's cycling capital because of
course I mention it and I am Dutch which
is not Danish in case you didn't know
that
and so this instills in me the
obligation to think and talk of
Amsterdam and not Copenhagen as the
epicenter of all things cycling so the
first key difference between Amsterdam
and Copenhagen is the successful
transformation of that cities name into
a verb to Copenhagen eyes is an elegant
and dynamic neologism in the Netherlands
the most famous attempt to convert
Amsterdam into a captivating neologism
is actually the title of a 1988 horror
movie Amsterdam very unfortunate it's
unfortunate movie
well so it's probably just a coincidence
although I'm not sure that our speaker
and tonight actually worked in
filmmaking in Toronto Canada and after a
stint as an exchange student in film and
philosophy at the University of
Copenhagen I do wonder and maybe this is
for the Q&A whether or not michael has
seemed amsterdam's which I can assure
you I've seen many times second key
difference between Copenhagen and
Amsterdam
is that the star player in the Dutch
soccer team that won the 1988 euro cup
was an elegant striker Marco from Boston
whereas the star on the Danish team that
won the 1992 euro cup was Peter
Schmeichel
Denmark beat the Netherlands that year
unfortunately but perhaps more
relevantly to tonight is that both
Denmark and the Midlands beat Germany in
the run-up to those two events and yes
Michel also lived and worked in Berlin
Germany again working primarily in the
area of film the final and perhaps the
most relevant difference between
Copenhagen and M became evident at last
week's cycling World Championships where
the Netherlands gathered an impressive
eight medals across all categories
compared to Denmark's two but the point
of Copenhagen eise's work as I know as I
assume Michel will explain tonight is
actually to distinguish clearly and
consistently between the lycra clad
competitive cycling of that event and
those like it on the one hand and the
cycling as a form of transportation on
the other dating back to the early
beginnings of the Copenhagen eyes
approach was to blog and now the
Instagram feed cycle chic if you haven't
checked it out you should this features
images of urban cyclists dressed for
your destination not your journey
it is this motto dress for your
destination not for your journey that of
course brings cities like Amsterdam and
Copenhagen together Michael joined the
Copenhagen eyes design company in 2015
after completing a graduate degree in
City Planning from McGill University in
Montreal from his Montreal headquarters
of the North
in office of Copenhagen eyes he oversees
planning projects from Detroit to the
city of Long Beach California
most recently the firm has done work
with the city of Akron Ohio so perhaps a
last suggestion for a question for the
QA would be whether or not Michael has
met LeBron James please join me in
welcoming to the Milton school thank you
thank you for that wonderful
introduction and thank you to the
Knowlton school for having me so as
you'll notice right off the bat hearing
my accent I am NOT Danish so I'm
Canadian
I'm from French Canada from Montreal I'm
an urban designer based out of Montreal
I guess by way of Berlin and Copenhagen
and other places I've explored and
fallen in love with and have been back
in Montreal for about three years now
running our North American studio as a
North American hopefully trying to
inspire more North Americans to why it
matters that we care at all about these
cities that we're talking about
Copenhagen after them so we're gonna
talk about bicycle urbanism today and
bicycle urbanism by design so who are we
what is Copenhagen eyes design company
we alluded to this just before started
originally by our founder Michael
Colville Anderson in about 2007 2009 as
a blog a series of blogs cycle Sheik and
Copenhagen eyes and the idea was to try
to talk to the world about why we should
Copenhagen eyes why we should understand
what simple design elements are
happening for normal transport and use
the bicycle as that tool to bring that
around the world so what we do as the
firm the firm's started in about 2011
and it's grown into four satellite
offices around the world headquartered
of Copenhagen all of our North American
work here in Montreal as well as
Brussels in Barcelona so that we can do
work in French language countries and
Spanish language countries and we
generally try to focus on three areas so
I'll jump to the last of the three first
research and education so this is born
out of who we were as this blog to start
wanting to talk about what is the hall
the high-level research is happening
around the world with regard to cycling
with regard to urban cycling normal
cycling and
how do we educate people around the
world how do we talk about this how do
we disseminate this information to
people on all continents across the
globe otherwise we do work more standard
planning work and design with cities
working on full citywide bicycle
strategies neighborhood development
plans with regard to the bicycle and
street level designs as well and then we
work on communications projects so we're
working right now for example with the
city of school in France to basically
develop a wayfinding strategy for their
cycle superhighway Network essentially a
suburban highway network route that
they're developing so some of the work
I'm not gonna stay on this for too long
I more want to talk about why this
matters but some of the work that we've
been doing around the world in the last
few years like was mentioned before
we've been working on the Greater
downtown bicycle Network strategy for
specific Detroit as well as a network
strategy here in Ohio and Akron as well
as a number of other projects whether
they are campaigns like things have been
done in Copenhagen or otherwise we often
welcome a lot of people to Copenhagen
and take them on tours we've had
countless delegations come through over
the years and we're constantly busy or
the Copenhagen office is more busy I
wish I was more busy in Copenhagen
giving tours on a daily basis because
it's a lot of fun but we're doing that
quite regularly so let's get down into
the the crux of what I want to talk
about so our focus is the streets the
streets are the skeletal structure of
the city organism we see cities as these
growing evolving ever-changing organisms
and so we want to focus on those
arteries the skeletal structure and we
know from anthropology that urbanism and
settlements have existed for ten to
seven thousand years and streets were
always these Democratic spaces they were
always these places where people played
yes people transported themselves but
people fell in love they saw their
friends they went to the market these
were places where city life happened
they were the Agora's
and we hear this all the time in our
work but I'm sure you guys have all
heard it as well well you know this
bicycle-friendly thing you know the
hipsters are riding and oh you know
maybe the poor person's gonna take a
bicycle you hear all these these things
all over the place about what bicycle
friendly is and this isn't something new
cities were once bicycle friendly we
have tons of photographic and map
evidence from around the world and yes
even in North America that cities wore
bicycle friendly we have cop brigades
that were all on bikes as a normal thing
we have riding groups we have kids going
to school by bicycle in the morning this
was a normal form of transport we see it
in maps so this map here is from my fair
city of Montreal Canada and this is a
bicycle Network map from 1897 yeah we
were talking about bicycle networks in
1897 so what we do is not novel we're
just trying to remind people that this
has existed this conversation has
existed for a very long time Detroit
Motor City America this city the
downtown was literally paved for the
bicycle you had wood that was a material
being used to create streets which
eventually once the bicycle came onto
the scene wood didn't work quite so well
it was quite bumpy so we literally
started paving Motor City America for
the bicycle that's a pretty stark piece
of history that should show us that the
bicycle matters in our history to some
to some degree so what happened well we
all know the rise of the automobile this
is a photo I believe it was from a World
Expo in the 30s or 40s and this was sort
of an image of the future this was you
know towers in the sky highways
everywhere but at the end of the day
does this look that different from a lot
of what's been built over the last 50 to
70 years
no and arguably the greatest paradigm
shift in the history of our cities
happened around the 40s and 50s
suddenly the streets were no longer this
place where human life just happened it
was rather a place that needed to be
efficient and needed to be efficient for
one mode for the car there
this wasn't just a natural change this
was a concerted effort by Auto Lobby
- actually institute new concepts that
didn't exist before so that the streets
could be used for that only utilitarian
purpose only for cars
if you think that jaywalking is
something that's just existed since the
dawn of time when you're wrong
jaywalking was literally constructed
concept by the auto lobby a J was a
country bumpkin who didn't understand
the highfalutin way of city life and so
if you were a jaywalker you were just
like ambling crossing the street
wherever you wanted like everybody did
for thousands of years and now suddenly
the car was here and you could not get
in the way of the car how dare you play
in the streets you have to cross on a
crosswalk you can't cross diagonally we
have to keep people in order so that the
car can function so one thing that we
try to do like I said at Copenhagen eyes
is the communications and education
aspect and so we try to distill these
larger historical conversations into
bite-sized memes because we know this is
how things travel around the world in
the internet these days so this is one
of our favorites and it's called a brief
history of traffic engineering so let's
start in the 1800s point A to point B
direct transport for your feet and your
horse that's how you got around that
those were your transport networks 1900s
we start to see some early technological
inventions we see early public transport
they're not completely direct it's a bit
awkward how you get from point A to
point B they don't fully work but the
bicycle was very very prominent on the
scene and it was direct a2b connection
the 20s we start to see the beginning of
the automobile and again it's a bit
awkward at the beginning you know Ford's
first invention was the quadricycle
which was made a bicycle part parts
another fun fact but at the at the
beginning at the invention of the car it
was a bit awkward but still you had
direct a2b connections for pedestrians
for bicycles and for public transport
for trams and buses early buses at that
time and we look at the 50s to now and
we've done this entire role reversal
where the only direct a2b connection is
for the car our public transport
networks are loop-de-loops that
eventually get you to where you want to
go and it's hard to even say that for
bikes and pedestrians that we have
networks they're essentially just these
concatenations of lines that
don't necessarily even go anywhere so
the thing that gives me and my
colleagues and other people we work with
a little bit of hope and I hope it would
give you guys some hope as well is that
there's another shift happening and
really we can see it since 2004 2005
there's something changing in political
rhetoric in a lot of cities around the
world so this is a quote I always really
like to put up on the screen the fact is
that automobiles no longer have a place
in the big cities of our time yes it's a
big statement I'm not saying this is
exactly what everybody should follow but
it's interesting to know who said this
because I think that kind of shows that
something is shifting can anybody guess
what city this person would have come
from to make a big bold statement like
this just shut it up New York London
yeah I was expecting to get more
responses of like Oh a little Dutch or
Danish town so we usually get but anyway
you were on the right path
it's a mayor Paris the most arguably car
oriented European city of 12 million
people congested terrible air this is
the mayor of Paris saying we need to
change it's enough this cannot be our
future we're at peak car because we're
at a point where we have to change the
question because we have no other option
we're at peak car we're at a point where
we cannot build our way out of
congestion we can't build our way out of
obesity we can't do what we want to do
by just building more we have to change
the way that we're thinking about this
so this is the model that we've been
employing since the 50s this is what the
majority of the federal highway
administration standards are based on
something called level of service and
the question that a traffic engineer is
asked is how many cars can you fit down
this street if it's more it gets a
higher grade if it's less it gets a
lower grade so which means if you
suddenly are able to move a ton of bikes
and a ton of public transport a ton of
pedestrians it's irrelevant it's getting
a low score because you're going to
damage vehicle throughput so if we
change the question to how many people
can we move down the street irrespective
of the mode we know that we can increase
capacity up
tenfold there's a lot of studies that
have shown us this so changing that
question is how we have to move forwards
and a little bit of positive news that
the FHWA in the last couple years has
started to acknowledge that this is
something that can be measured I just
think it's gonna take some time until
the powers that be start doing that more
regularly so another way of looking at
this again on the meme side of things
basic urban math congestion busting
Copenhagen style so this is an
intersection in Copenhagen and when
people tell you oh those damn bikes are
creating congestion oh the buses stopped
in front of me it's creating congestion
what's creating congestion generally in
these cars you have one maybe two people
in maybe there's occasionally a carpool
or a rideshare but for the most part
look at these space efficiency
differences between bikes public
transport and cars so we like to say
this is the model for traffic planning
in the 21st century this is what a
modern city does from a traffic planning
perspective and I'll explain this you
make getting around by bike super easy
point A to point B same thing for
pedestrians same thing for public
transport and this is contentious make
driving a pain in the ass because if you
don't do that
where's that space coming from you have
to change the paradigm so what are we
actually talking about to get out of
some of the high-level philosophy stuff
well we're talking about the bicycle and
of course there's a ton of other great
work that needs to be done especially in
the public transport space and for how
we walk around our cities and and in
placemaking and it parks and greenery
and all this other great stuff but I
want to focus on talking about cycling
it's what we focus on in our work so we
really believe that the bicycle is this
really powerful transformative tool to
redesign our streets in our cities but
as he was alluded to before we're not
talking about cycling for sport we're
talking about cycling for transport for
the 99% for the demographic that isn't
cycling today that could be there have
been a number of replicated studies
around the world in a lot in North
America that show that usually there is
four general groups of your types of
cyclists or potential cyclists
you'll have 30% give or take depending
on the city but usually somewhere in
there 30% that say no way no how I'm not
getting on a bike either I have mobility
issues I'd only get out of my car fare a
third of people but then we have the
small percentage it's usually one in
five that will be the really sort of the
really intense cyclists the the road
warriors they'll ride under any
condition they'll ride video on a
highway they don't care they just want
to be on their bike you'll have the five
percent that will right under most
conditions but again they don't really
care about the infrastructure of course
they'd be happier but what we see is the
largest contingent it's usually around
two thirds of the population say that
they're interested but they're concerned
why are they concerned safety
connectivity reliability all the things
that we know we want in our life in
transport so we know that latent demand
exists and we have to fill it and it's
important for us to understand what a
bicycle is because this is something
that's vastly misunderstood when you're
planning for the bicycle the bicycle is
not a vehicle since I believe the 70s or
so in the US and in Canada the the
bicycle legislatively has been
considered a vehicle and we've been
planning for the bicycle as if it takes
a whole Lane it turns on the left lane
like cars the bicycle is not a vehicle
it's a fast-moving pedestrian it's a
squishy thing it doesn't have a big
metal box it's much closer to a
pedestrian than a car so now let's get
to Copenhagen why does this matter why
is this our reference point and why am i
talking to you about this today well
first of all this is a photo that I took
on my commute when I worked out of our
Copenhagen office in the morning so
people know Copenhagen has this
beautiful dreamlike land where just all
these blonde people are riding their
bicycles with their long legs into the
Nordic sunrise and sunset these gorgeous
images you know you have hence Christian
Andersen fairy tales playing in your
head on an audiobook or whatever and and
even the logo from the city of
Copenhagen it's I bike CPH it's inspired
by the Isle of New York it's like the
bicycle is part of our
but this is advertising this is
marketing they did a really good job of
marketing because you bought all that
but that's not the reality this is the
reality of the city so these are the
faces of people that ride in the morning
does she look happy her kid kept her up
she didn't sleep she's never coffee
shouldn't have the grounds at home
whatever she's on her bike piss she has
to because it's the best way to get from
point A to point B the bicycle is not
fetishized the bicycle isn't thought of
this dreamlike thing for Copenhagen errs
the bicycle is a vacuum cleaner the
bicycle is a sewing machine the logo
should be I vacuum clean Copenhagen
because essentially the bicycle is your
tool it's not something that you you
know show off to your friends
you basically just store it away when
you're done you use it for the function
that it needs to give you in your life
and then you put it away you don't go to
the bar and talk about your bike with
your friends
Copenhagen errs don't they just take the
bike get to the bar and talk about their
life it's just a tool and when we ask
Copenhagen heiress the city asks them
every single year through the Danish
Technical University why do you ride a
bicycle and the answer every single year
the predominant majority is it's quick
its efficient it makes sense of course
there's a small percentage that says I
do it for exercise and and then even
less people that say it's inexpensive
because of course it is but notice that
a tiny contingent say I want to save a
polar bear by riding my bicycle of
course I'm not saying that I'm not for
sustainability of course I'm for
sustainability of course I'm for the
environment but that's not how you
market it you don't tell people you ride
a bicycle you're gonna save the
environment they go okay I'm gonna do
that now that's not how it works and we
see from Copenhagen as an example that
it's about efficiency it's about
convenience in a in a person's life and
this is why they're riding so this is a
scene from a regular morning commute
this is the world's busiest bicycle
Street in the world sorry
Netherlands 45,000 bikes every single
day on Queen Louise's bridge here and
eighty-six percent of the traffic that
goes through this corridor everything
they are bicycles of course this is not
every single street in Copenhagen the
numbers are still very substantial but
this is this is this is why we're
inspired by the city some numbers so we
can understand Copenhagen a little
better and cycling in Copenhagen
contextualise it so the regional
Copenhagen area the third most sprawling
municipality in Europe so it's not just
this tiny little dense European city 2.5
million people 42 percent of people ride
every single day is their mode of
transportation central Copenhagen about
650,000 people it is definitely a denser
European core 62% of people ride for
work or for education seventy-five
percent of those people ride through the
whole winter
the modal split from the last bicycle
count which comes out every two years
from the city which looks at a ton of
different cycling data surveys counts
all these different things
infrastructure spending so the latest
number from the city sixty-two percent
of people ride a bicycle over is the
mode of transportation twenty-one
percent of people take buses and the
Metro and the regional trains eight
percent of people walk and nine percent
of people drive and that's not even
breaking down also ride shares and and
and things like that so the single
occupant vehicle rate in the city of
governing is very low and they've done
an amazing job of being able to show
that change over a 40 year 40 plus year
period so essentially a lot of the
change and we'll get into this in a
minute a lot of the change in Copenhagen
and other parts of Denmark and the
Netherlands and other parts of northern
Europe we see this change that really
started in the 1970s with the oil crisis
and we see that this was a this is data
that comes from the city essentially
they they looked at two rings of the
city the outer ring the municipal border
and then they call the lakes ring
because there's some lakes that sort of
form a half ring so they built a ring of
bicycle counters and car counters so
that they could compare for 40 years a
huge longitudinal longitudinal survey
about how many bikes how many cars do we
have and by doing the outside of the
inside they can tell is this just people
leaving and coming in differently or is
this actually a shift in the modal share
in the city and this is data from the
inner the inner ring and you
see in 2016 the number of bikes in the
city surpassed the number of cars which
was a huge huge huge feat for the city
and what does that look like from a
financial perspective well of course the
city has invested so the city and not
just the city also a whole bunch of
local charities and government grants
from the national level have invested
three hundred million dollars in Danish
crowns between 2006 and 2007 teen give
or take so some people might go wow
that's a lot of money thirty million
dollars a year
it's about comparable to my city the
Montreal's cycling budget to many other
cities cycling budgets around the world
but they spent that money on
infrastructure on dedicated protected
connected infrastructure and the amazing
thing is the return you will never find
an infrastructural project that has a
return on investment like cycling
infrastructure this literally brought in
it to society not directly to the city
to society through different means over
two hundred million dollars per year so
that's a huge return on your investment
and there have been some enormous cost
benefit analysis analyses that have been
done in Copenhagen by some of the fruit
this is the first one the data from the
first one big engineering firm called Co
V and essentially they were looking at a
multitude of factors they were looking
at time loss because of because of
health by driving trying to look at the
degradation of the road and the costs
for that with regard to cycling versus
cars all these different factors in
these huge societal cost-benefit
analyses showing that actually for every
kilometer cycled society gains 65 cents
and society loses 71 cents for every
kilometer driven and more numbers to
show that this just works is that we
know from countless studies that almost
6,000 people per hour can go down a
standard Copenhagen style cycle track
that's usually about eight feet minimum
width in one direction so it kind of has
a fast and a slow lane and then your car
lane which can fit about 1,300 cars and
good luck trying to get all of those
cars to share so that you can bump that
number up maybe some but
the numbers don't lie here so Copenhagen
wasn't always Copenhagen and this is
something that I always really try to
stress especially when we're talking
North America because the result that we
get all the time is well that's there
this is here it's never gonna happen and
if you would have said that to a
Copenhagen er and probably many Dutch
people as well in the 60s and the 50s oh
well you know what do you think about
people cycling everywhere they're like
well I can't see it like our city
streets are just clogged with autumn
with with motorized vehicles this is a
square in the city centre called Gamal
Torah which essentially was a parking
lot in the 60s and that's the square
today that's concerted effort and work
on the part of the city through design
to change that this is a bike pedestrian
only Street now this is actually it was
the original home of sÃ¸ren kierkegaard
really famous Danish philosopher so it's
an important tourist destination and
then there's there's food stands there's
a there's a fountain there's a market on
certain days there's ample bike parking
and it actually has life on the streets
now this street can anybody guess which
Street this is from the 60s you guessed
it same street today so let's talk about
design a little bit how am i doing on
time
okay so we are called Copenhagen eyes
design company it's something we really
care about it's something that we think
needs to be talked about more especially
in in the urban planning realm because
design means intentionality design means
having a focus and having a direction
and yes maybe having a bias but having a
choice that you make in the work that
you do and this is what we can see
through the example of Copenhagen it's
asking yourself what kind of city do I
want to live in and building for that do
you want to see a city with cars
everywhere great four lanes in each
direction flyovers yeah the cars will
come because you'll make it easy to
drive if you want to see kids riding to
school if you want to see all ages and
abilities cycling somebody wearing
whatever they want on their bicycle able
to do it feeling safe
you know we run anthropological studies
sometimes and we'll actually look
how many people are smoking a cigarette
on their bike how many people are like
holding their partner's hand riding
side-by-side how many people are on
their cellphone which is you know it's
not allowed but that's a sign that
people are feeling safe because they've
been built for they've been thought of
because the questions have been asked
what kind of city do I want to live in
by the people that are designing and
planning the infrastructure and so we
asked what if we used basic design
principles and Denmark being a land of
design very well known for furniture and
lighting and other things like that and
bike infrastructure asking if we
actually applied that and not just
engineering standards not just dogma not
just what we need to copy and paste but
actually this understanding of basic
design principles to our roads to our
city streets what would we get would we
be able to design it much like we design
a product for users so let's look at
three elements well when you design
something you want it to be intuitive so
all of these chairs that you're sitting
on you didn't need to read a manual when
you walked in today you just knew okay
this opens and my bum goes here that
serves a function so it's intuitive
secondly it's encouraging you wanted to
sit the chair helps you sit it
encouraged you to facilitate some
function in your life and then thirdly
it's desirable I mean the product needs
to be elegant it needs to be sexy needs
to draw you in because otherwise you're
gonna go to something else so what if we
tried to reinvent the chair what if we
forgot about those principles and we
said oh you know let's just like trying
to completely reinvent the wheel and
completely come up with something super
innovative you know let's like just
check this out
let's put sensors everywhere on the
chair what does it lead to does this
look like a cycling map of a lot of our
cities yeah I mean it looks like a chair
but would do it you know if you stand
you'll fall if you sit you'll fall it
doesn't really serve a function so we
need to try to understand what the thing
looks like and what the function is and
be drawn to use it so let's look at some
examples so is this designed this is an
example from Pennsylvania Avenue in
Washington DC this is a two-way cycle
track that runs down the middle of a
very busy street and we always ask
ourselves what's this
design is it intuitive that you're on
the sidewalk with your bike because
you're coming out of a destination
you're like okay so I have to somehow
Frogger across three lanes of traffic to
get there and then I can get on my bike
but there's bikes going past I don't
know where I get on my bike okay and
then I'm supposed to read a bunch of
stuff okay so that's the aw that's
really intuitive secondly is it
encouraging no it's just I don't know I
you know I I don't want to go there with
with kids it's not encouraging to help
me with that function and I honestly
don't find it desirable I don't find it
attractive either this is my city this
is Montreal and I'm sure you all know
bike lanes like this everywhere
the plain-jane bike lane as we call it
it is putting a squishy vulnerable thing
on two wheels between two metal boxes
one that moves really fast and one that
has swinging doors so had the person in
the room designing this said that they
would have been okay maybe we shouldn't
put it there but instead it was built on
engineering standards and this was just
leftover space let's give it to the
bikes they'll figure it out how about
the sheriff so everybody know the
dreaded share oh so this is for those
that don't know the share arrow it's
essentially a traffic engineering
telling bikes share the road
it's that design so how does design work
in a Copenhagen context the context here
is the word that's key trying to
understand what is that Street need but
not over complicating it not trying to
reinvent the wheel so we have the wheel
of infrastructure the context wheel of
infrastructure we call the Copenhagen
eyes bicycle planning guide for contexts
for every necessary type of bicycle
infrastructure that you'll find through
a Denmark and for the most part
Netherlands really follows a very
similar guide to this and essentially
let's walk through them quickly so that
we can understand them so the first
quadrant here essentially you'll see the
two factors that that play into the
context are speed so not just posted
speed that you'll see on the sign but
design speed how fast are people
actually able to go and and volume how
many cars are moving down the street per
day so the first context is essentially
a share
environment low speeds low volumes then
we're talking painted lines a little bit
higher speeds higher volumes we're
getting to significant speeds
significant volumes protected lanes and
then we're getting to buffered and
protected faraway lanes
so let's actually see what they look
like so shared space these are all
Copenhagen examples but these are
examples that in our work we can still
establish this around the world because
these design principles are still
transferable so for example this is a
road you have very few cars that pass
through here it's not a cut through
that's necessary to get from an arterial
to an arterial it's it's it's people's
homes and the speed cannot be elevated
because there's all these things in the
way you know informal chicane Xand and
little barbecue areas this is really
where a street can be a shared street so
we see bad examples of this in a lot of
North American cities these days where
they're being called bicycle boulevards
so it's this really wide right-of-way
often 12-foot lanes which is like you
could you know fit almost a bus and a
car and that and essentially you're
putting down a logo that says you know
share the road well this is a real
shared space because the context is
right so we go up in context to the
second piece so this is a painted lane
in a Copenhagen context and a painted
lane will always be between the curb and
the drive lane and that is because we
are closer to pedestrians than we are to
cars on a bicycle and we're more
vulnerable so if you want to take your
kid on a street like this that has a
painted lane because of the context you
can let your kid if they're really young
right on the sidewalk and you ride next
to them they can get off quickly if
they're you know not feeling safe it
allows for a way a human way of using
that street as infrastructure sometimes
you'll also see a buffer here sort of
wider area for during zone this is a bit
of a narrower street but always next to
the curb so then when we get higher
speeds and higher volumes and this is a
more northern portion of that busy
bicycle street I showed you guys before
we'll get to the cycle track and the
cycle track is really the main basic
building block the Lego piece if you
will of the Copenhagen cycling
infrastructure network because
essentially here you have three levels
of sidewalk you have
the pedestrian sidewalk which steps down
to the bicycle sidewalk which steps down
to the roadway and here everybody has
their own delineated space but then in
North America we're seeing different
versions of the protected bike lane as
it's sometimes called or the cycle track
and and this can be designed in many
different ways but again higher speeds
higher volumes you protect and then we
get to the buffered cycle track and this
is really high speeds really high
volumes things like motorways and at a
bare minimum this is an absolute minimum
have some real division between the cars
and the bikes sometimes you'll let the
bikes go two ways because there's no
intersections which can be problematic
and in situations like this the roadway
is so big and impossible to cross that
two ways on one side makes sense or you
have these paths going through parks and
completely away from the roads and the
thing to take away from the design and
the context in in infrastructure in
Copenhagen is that it's designed so that
you can be inherently social and it's
based on this human centered design that
recognizes the transport of social so
all of the cycle tracks at a bare
minimum will have a very very minimum
will be 7 feet in width
generally 8 to 9 and then sometimes even
up to 13 14 feet on the really busy
bicycle corridors and why is that
because of something that the city of
Copenhagen calls conversation cycling
it's not illegal to ride two abreast
because the recognition is if this is a
mode of transport you are a social
creature as a human you need to be
social while you transport yourself you
talk to your friend on the way home from
school on the way home from work you
ride with your kid next to you on the
way to school in the morning and the
cycling infrastructure has to be
sufficiently wide and safe for two
people to ride next to each other with a
third often even cargo bike a wider bike
to pass you on the left so I always use
the analogy you know what if the cars
were forced to be designed like like
fighter jets and everybody had to just
be like right behind in front of each
other in the same vehicle we would find
that ridiculous because well you know we
always want to have a passenger we want
to talk to somebody in our cars so why
aren't we applying that to bicycle
infrastructure
and that's what Copenhagen does and the
other reason we're very inspired by the
design of the city is that there's all
these other elements that are human
centered pieces that really make sure
that we are designing for people and not
just to get around but in all of the
different ways you need to use the
infrastructure so these little pieces
that we call micro designs so this
example is a tilted garbage can so you
ride in the morning and you have your
coffee cup and you want to throw it out
you don't want to spill on yourself and
maybe you try to throw it in the garbage
can but you miss the city actually
noticed a huge pile of garbage by a lot
of the garbage can so they're like why
don't we do some sort of iterative
design and just try to angle them by the
cycle track and they did and people are
you know the game of buying it all the
time another piece I really love is the
the foot and the armrest and you'll see
this a lot of the major intersections
and there's a lot of really interesting
anthropological elements that come out
of this piece of design because you know
we've all heard all these damn cyclists
they don't stop at red lights whether or
not that's true whether or not there's
data that backs that up we know that
that that concept exists in society so
to fight that from a purely marketing
perspective why don't we give a thing
for cyclists to actually be comfortable
at to promote waiting at the red light
to promote the behavior we want to see
instead of scolding and then and then
wondering what's happened so you'll see
these all over the city and and these
footrests are really cool because
there's opportunities for marketing so
here this is the city's super cycle
highway sort of suburban bike network
that's that's being advertised there and
then you're seeing these pop up all
around the world now I'm not sure else
just to put in a bunch of these you'll
see them in Minneapolis in Chicago
they're quite comfortable so you don't
have to get off your saddle at a light
and then the other pieces of information
are macro design these big pieces of
infrastructure that connect pieces that
really need a small like half mile
quarter mile connection so this is
called the bicycle snake the sukkah
Solana in Danish and essentially it
connects on the south end since there is
a sea Harbor that goes through the city
of Copenhagen it connects the first ever
bicycle pedestrian only bridge which was
built and I believe 2008 which is just
below down here
it used to be that you would get off the
bicycle pedestrian bridge and you'd have
all these wharfs that you'd have to sort
of kind of walk kind of ride your bike
and there's stairs and it took forever
and it was not good for bicycles at all
and so they said why don't we build this
small connection that really just
increases the efficiency for this small
piece and they were expecting maybe
10,000 bikes would use it a day
I think it's used by almost 25,000 bikes
a day now so huge effects with pieces of
a macro design like this and then
talking more about playful design
talking about things like what we call
the Green Wave so for many years in
cities around the world our traffic
engineers have been linking up green
lights at a certain speed for cars so
that you can drive through that area no
problem at a certain speed if you're in
a car and get that Green Wave all the
way into work in the morning and out at
the end of the day and they said well
why don't we just do that for bikes but
we'll do it at like slower speeds that
work for bikes and we'll gamify it so
here on this stretch which sort of
sometimes works and sometimes doesn't
unfortunately near the University of
Copenhagen you essentially if you see
the green lights you know you caught the
wave and so you ride on it you know
you're gonna get the green light at the
next light but if it starts going out
you literally have to speed up to catch
that Green Wave and vice versa so it's a
really really interesting regulating
force and playing with the
infrastructure another thing to get
people that to want to cycle because
it's fun so one thing that we hear all
the time is but my city is too cold
my cities too Hayley in my city is too
hot people won't ride and the thing
about design is that by thinking about
what a person needs and being able to
build for that like we're building a
product we can seduce them to use it of
course we're not saying everybody's
gonna ride through the winter but with a
well built system and good maintenance
we can have huge numbers like we see in
Copenhagen with new inventions that
we're having now like the ebike we can
essentially make Hills irrelevant
there's all these things that are
happening on the level of design and
more from product focused perspective
where we can start to not see these
issues as issues but transcend them
so in Copenhagen what happens on first
snowfall is that you have these little
machines that are just buzzing back and
forth first priority streets are the
streets of bicycle infrastructure and
they have a policy that first thing in
the morning there has to be black
asphalt so if it snows throughout the
whole night they will go back and forth
three times so that you can trust that
the bicycle infrastructure is always
available for you to use of course
there's always little blips there's
always the occasional situation where
there's a huge snowstorm and maybe you
have to wait a couple hours but
essentially all bicycle users are
intermodal citizens too so if your bike
breaks down one day you take a bus
but generally the system is always there
and functional for you so this is a
picture I will leave you on Copenhagen
with a picture of all of the streets in
central Copenhagen that have protected
cycle tracks on both sides of the street
like we saw in that picture before
that's the one in orange and the one in
blue are all of the streets that are
priority snow cleared corridors
throughout the winter it's the same
thing because at the end of the day if
it's not a reliable Network people are
not gonna use it so that's where I'm
gonna put a pin in Copenhagen since I've
been talking about Copenhagen for a
while and I'm gonna sort of end off
talking about some of the things we're
seeing around the world in some of the
work that we do that I do find really
inspiring and shows us that we're
getting past the point of having to just
talk about Copenhagen and Amsterdam
again because it's not about them
anymore
they have been doing it for 40 or 50
years we can learn and we are learning
from them but it's about we call the
zeroes to heroes the cities that were
doing nothing five years ago and there
was nobody cycling and the data showed
it and they suddenly did some of these
things and we're really starting to see
that build it and they will come
situations so every two years we do
something called the Copenhagen eyes
index which is probably the biggest
project that we do this was from 2017 so
we're actually just about I guess in a
month or two starting our next research
phase for 2019 we spent about three or
four months across all four of our
offices researching 160 cities of
600,000 people or more around the world
and then ranking them based on 14
different parameters so it's the largest
most comprehensive
pensive cycling index in the world and
and you know we tend to get quoted as
sort of the the index to look to to
understand what's happening because we
look at things that are more than just
modal share and kilometers of
infrastructure and these sort of hard
numbers so we look at what is happening
in the political sphere so what kind of
of movements are is the political
environment making for cycling focused
policies is there a bicycle office in
the actual city government that's
actually managing this stuff it's not
just getting swept up in the engineering
department or in the planning department
but they actually have a voice sometimes
it's bikes and pedestrians a new one we
just added this last index in 2017 its
cargo bike logistics so what's happening
with cargo bikes because cargo bikes
essentially the SUV of the bicycle
kingdom we see huge affects especially
in cities like Copenhagen and a lot of
northern European cities starting in
North America you see I believe it's two
out of three families with two kids or
more have a cargo bike in Copenhagen
there's a 45,000 cargo bikes across the
city it's it's a really amazing thing so
looking at all these factors you can
really start to give us a picture of who
are the cities that are doing
interesting things and also creating a
bit of a like a friendly competition
around the world so like hey I want to
be better than them we're gonna like
really invest so that's the goal of this
project so I mean introduced just a few
of the cities that we've been really
inspired by and then I think we'll
probably wrap into some questions so
Paris like we mentioned before their new
mayor has been doing some amazing work
it's a huge city twelve million people
and the bike share system there was one
of the the first most successful
bike-share systems they've now gone into
their second phase and they're having
huge numbers of user ship ridership and
then they've also been systematically
taking really important streets a lot of
streets right along the sand the river
that runs through Paris and basically
saying you know what we're gonna cut out
half the traffic from here and we're
gonna put in a bike lane it's not always
the best sometimes it's a two-way cycle
track on the street which doesn't really
fit best practice but at least it's
getting people to understand cycling
connect them in a safe way and get them
out and you're starting to see that
change especially in the political
environment
Seville Seville I think is one of the
most interesting cities to look at or
visit if you have a chance
essentially in in the last decade they
went from almost 0% cycling to somewhere
in like 7 or 8% the modal share has just
is just increased um
tremendously in such a short period of
time and why is that it's because they
literally just built a network overnight
they just they just put it down on the
ground it's not the best design again
some of the lanes are really narrow you
have these like weird posts that I'm you
know kind of scary that you might run
into because they're metal too but at
the same time it still creates a
protected space that's connected that's
actually a network it gets you from
destination to destination across the
city and they've seen that in their
results and the city of Oslo the city of
Oslo has been incredibly inspiring
because this is a city that is the
capital of Norway that is a country that
loves their oil that loves their cars
that's very hilly as a city that's very
cold and gets a lot of snow so a lot of
a lot of the dissenting folk will be
like people never cycle in Oslo those
numbers have been shooting up like crazy
they've built an intermodal system for
skiing through this through the cities
public transport system and connected
that to bike infrastructure they have
basically created a guide that they call
the Oslo standard that essentially goes
against the national government that
says we don't like your standards
they're 1950s engineering focused we
want these standards that were largely
inspired by the Copenhagen model and
they're just doing it they're just
basically taking out hundreds of car
parking spots along important corridors
and doing really really concentrated
marketing efforts because of course
there's always people that are upset but
they're continuing to move along and
they're doing things like okay people
are upset so give them something give
them green space you know put some trees
on the corridor so you're also playing
with that marketing aspect as you're
taking doing something that people feel
like is being taken away from them for
the Benham in the city so this is a
really really interesting really
interesting example to look at and to
end off I think it's interesting to look
that this isn't just a European
phenomenon things are happening
here in a North American context which
is really exciting and really
inspirational we've had the opportunity
to work with the city of Detroit for the
last few years on doing their downtown
plan and this is a city with seven to
nine lane corridors there spoke roads
there there there historic spoke roads
that go through the center of the city
and the city is very willing and very
open now to thinking about this sort of
future and starting to think about how
bikes can really be a vehicle for change
excuse me not a vehicle a fast-moving
pedestrian for change in this city that
needs it so badly and we've been really
excited to work with them as well as the
city of Akron trying to also convert
some of their larger corridors into more
bicycle friendly environments so looking
at a bigger street like this a bigger
intersection saying how can you do a
protected intersection here with a
concrete a piece of concrete here where
cars have to do a larger turn around it
with protected cycle lanes and floating
bus islands that protect bicycle users
as the bus is coming in or how do we
look at a smaller street where maybe we
have to remove a whole bunch of parking
but this is a priority bicycle corridor
it's mainly painted lanes but we can
keep speed slow so applying a lot of
those same philosophies that were
inspired by in Copenhagen and trying to
apply that to a u.s. context and it's
starting to gain ground it's starting to
be built and it's starting to gain
ground and for us it's very exciting so
the next time somebody tells you yeah
but you know this is Columbus yeah
Detroit just remember like everybody's
saying that this is the same thing we
are hearing all over the world we are
fortunate enough in our work to be on
all corners of the world giving these
talks and having these conversations and
we're hearing the same thing from one
contingent saying yeah but we can't and
then they're seeing their neighbor do it
and they're like oh wait maybe these
design principles actually make sense
for us as well and we'd remember design
is universal good design is universal
and from a bicycling perspective we're
talking about a connected network safe
infrastructure reliable facilities
constructive communication and being
being proactive with your marketing
communication having a user focused and
an intuitive
so with that I say thank you and I guess
we'll leave it to questions
[Applause]
[Music]
I mean the only answer I can give you is
my own personal opinion I and and and us
as a firm really are we're behind doct
systems we're talking about docked bike
share and scooters versus ductless which
is you know the scooter systems we're
seeing are all doclist just like the
line bikes the doclets bikes
III really see the a lot of the work
that's that's that's going in super fast
by these tech companies that are
building scooters and bikes doctors
bikes as sort of a disrupter of the
market it's what they're trying to do I
think there will be some benefits from a
political level of saying oh people want
this I think there's a real damage and
fear or potential damage to say that
then citizen groups merchant groups and
portions the city will say we don't want
this stuff in our city because it's
clogging all the sidewalks
it's being tossed in canals and
alleyways and driveways so I think
there's a real danger with the Dhokla
systems I I personally am very much in
favor of these docked bike-share systems
because we've seen huge success so being
from Montreal we built the first North
American bike share system which is the
same system that's been rolled out in
countless cities across the u.s. and
Canada and our system has always been a
docked system it's a system that allows
for management by the city so that they
can rebalance it and grow it and sort of
strategically have those conversations
with shop owners and and community
boards and whatnot so that they can make
sure people aren't pissed off along the
process because that's a big problem is
that bikes are still seen as a nuisance
and scooters are still seen as a
nuisance by many so any sidestep that
we're taking to avoid the conversation
of being a nuisance I think is a
beneficial one so I would say there's
some good in having more people
chaotically riding around the city but
there's some potential damage there too
so I would say go push docks more than
doctors I saw this hand first
[Music]
so sort of two pieces that I would say I
mean first of all Caldwell three pieces
culture does not change overnight of
course it's going to be a messy process
of course but the success that we're
seeing a lot of cities around the world
especially in North America I would use
Calgary in Canada as an example that
kind of followed the seville model this
network overnight concept this minimum
grid network found a lot of success in
that department for the fact that they
chose three corridors through the
downtown and said we're gonna do one
type of design to keep it consistent and
we're gonna do as a pilot project and do
tons of marketing around it so that it
wasn't just a biplane that appeared here
and a bike lane that appeared there but
it was essentially this transformation
of their downtown as a pilot project
that got very very very like high-level
media attention and then there was a lot
of backlash against it in the end it did
get voted in to a permanent network and
that for them they've seen a lot of
success with of course with missteps and
cultural grumbles along the way the
other last point I would say to that is
this is also very much a Danish design
perspective and I know it's it's
somewhat separate from the Dutch
perspective in that the bidirectional
the 2-way cycle track on the street
should never be done in North American
context for at least 30 years I would
say and and if ever really because
ultimately when we look we recently ran
a study in Montreal which has the
largest number of protected on Street to
a cycle tracks in any North American
city and we do have a network even
though it's very bare-bones and kind of
starts and stops in certain places and
you can see the chaos that happens even
at a functional intersection with two
ways because you're talking about eight
flows of bicycle traffic and every other
type of transport on one corner whereas
when you split them in two
unidirectional tracks which are also
wide enough for a slow rider and a fast
rider or two people to talk side-by-side
on both sides of the street first of all
you're separating those potential
conflicts so you're creating half the
number of conflicts on both sides which
is good to not concentrate your conflict
potential in one spot but then what
you're also doing is you're creating a
system where the car driver should not
have to
be essentially it's it's that same idea
with intuitive design the car driver
should not need a manual to be told
where the bike is so the directional
logic in North America is that we drive
on the right side of the road so
logically the bike would be on my right
side because that's where the pedestrian
is so if we're building our cycle tracks
to be on that same directionally logical
place then we're minimizing the
potential for conflict whereas right now
I mean we see this in Montreal and other
cities around the world with the two-way
cycle tracks drivers are furious and
frustrated cuz they're like I have to
cross look for car traffic both ways
then look for bike traffic both ways
then look for pedestrians I don't know
what I'm doing and so we shouldn't make
it harder for the people that are
driving two-ton boxes so that's that's
that's my thought
and you also know that I think a lot of
people would take issue with that we
were in readiness training to autonomy
toward autonomy so there's the great
potential we're gonna be investment even
more and so I'm interested if you guys
have been thinking about what that means
a very very fair and thoughtful question
I mean when thinking about what
technology is going to change on our
streets because it's gonna happen one
way or another I think the perspective
that we take especially with regards to
shared and autonomous vehicles is that a
lot of the the push for this new
technology is to change the paradigm of
the single occupant vehicle because our
streets are it's it's it's not debatable
that our streets are clogged because we
have too many single people in their own
car taking up space so I think the
autonomous vehicle movement and the
ride-sharing movement and the bicycle
infrastructure movement are all in the
same page that the single occupant
vehicle is the dinosaur that needs to be
weeded out that needs to be made
difficult so I think we can agree on
that the the piece that I would say from
the bicycle planning perspective is that
when the autonomous vehicles take over
the road and suddenly everybody's
sharing and in fewer cars on the road
and suddenly we don't need parking
because cars are constantly moving
around and they're you know moving
themselves around and people are sharing
all those vehicles we free up a lot of
road space so what happens then so the
add the Advocate in me says before
autonomous vehicles come in we need to
go to the lowest hanging fruit and that
is eliminating car parking in a lot of
places on streets in America there is so
much car parking it makes my brain
explode and especially off street and
that's a whole other issue for urban
designers and and architects of course
so the question is this space that's
already so inefficient car parking this
space that's already so under under
utilized and under paid for but yet cost
society so much needs to be thought of
today as something that can be converted
to people and not cars because once
automated vehicles take over the streets
if it does happen in the way people are
saying it will space will be free and if
there's free space
we're gonna get back into induced demand
again we're gonna get back into a
situation where suddenly there's space
that's free so either we fill it with
more cars and then get right back to
where we are now 50 years from now where
we have oh my god we have too many
automated vehicles we're at peak
automated vehicle oh we should put some
bike infrastructure in or we start doing
this now we actually start redesigning
our streets now
I'll first I'll say I'm no expert in
China so I'm not gonna pretend to be but
secondly you look at the trends in China
from in comparison to the trends in
Europe and the more recent trends in
North America and China has done the
opposite I mean there were a lot of
bikes in China and the modal shares have
just diminished in Chinese cities in the
last 30 years they've been building a
ton of roadway infrastructure have you
seen these YouTube videos with the
craziest highway overpasses in the world
that have been built in the last 10
years in China I mean III think a lot of
the the road construction that's been
happening in China today is is what we
we saw 4050 years ago here and so I
think that again not no not claiming to
be an expert expert in China at all but
I think that definitely would have
contributed to two fewer bicycle
you
[Applause]
