so good evening to everyone and welcome
to the bomber series my name is Eric
Herman I'm an assistant professor of
architecture here at the Knowlton School
it's my privilege to introduce tonight's
speakers Rosalyn Shea and Troy Sean
Rosen and Troy are the founding
collaborators of Sean Shea an
architectural practice established in
2009 that currently operates between
Houston Texas in New York City Rosalyn
is an architect and the Marion Mahoney
fellow at MIT where she's working on a
project about place at the intersection
of material culture oral history and
post-colonial identity in Taiwan Troy is
an architect and educator as well
currently researching and teaching in
his capacity as associate professor at
the Rice School of Architecture Troy has
also extensive experience in practice at
a wide range of scales and project types
mirroring this dispersed practice Troy
and Rosalyn's current and completed
projects with Sean Shea include working
context as varied as Detroit New York
Martha Houston and Virginia the practice
was a finalist in the 2017 MoMA ps1
young architects program a winner of the
2016 new practices New York by the AIA
and most recently named one of the 2009
emerging voices by the architectural
League of New York their work has been
exhibited at the Venice Biennale
ArtPrize in Grand Rapids storefront for
art and architecture and the Center for
architecture in New York Sean Shay's
work explores the intersections of art
architecture and the city the practice
has been celebrated as idiosyncratic
nuanced offbeat and in several recent
instances even surprising as architects
are not satisfied with solving but
prefer augmenting revealing situating
and mediating other tactics they claim
and include and their toolkit are
inserting feathering linking unfolding
and enmeshing so clearly they pay
diligent attention to the nuances of
design language both written and formal
asking leading questions and for
grounding moments after the act of
building demonstrating their how their
work performs and commute
kate's the practice is also frequently
praised for knowing how to do more with
less for finding ways to support and
surprise within the bounds of
architectures many representational and
constructive limits it might be tempting
to trace Sean Shay's off cited interest
in the prosaic everyday in conventional
to the size and age of their practice
after all Troy and Ruslan's
collaboration is relatively young a
small operation and develop and growing
and developing through a series of
modestly scaled and growing Commission's
all circumstances that require them to
be tactical and economical but
attributing Sean Shay's restraint and
attention to norms as circumstantial
doesn't give adequate credit to their
deliberate approach one that is by their
own description soft loose and
disjunctive but at the same time precise
their work often reflects on itself but
not in a way that feels ironic or
stagnant ly self-aware instead Troy and
Rosalind have developed active
methodologies for disarming assumptions
and swiftly replacing them with new
possibilities the word minor often
appears in the way they describe their
instruments of design minor plans and
minor diagrams labeling something minor
can be a strategy to hedge or equivocate
suggesting work is less serious or
important but I would suggest that the
minor used by Troy and Rosalind is more
in the musical sense where the
difference between major and minor isn't
about significance but tonality more
specifically the minor is a musical
category that emerges from resonance
made possible by taking modest half
steps to extend the metaphor the
architectural half steps of Sean Shay
are not apologetic or conciliatory but
intentional and revelatory the nuances
in their work call attention to context
in the city all the other notes and
Timbers in the composition so in other
words Troy and Rosen's collection of
work offers not only an exciting new
voice but one that does not but does so
by subtly changing the voice excuse me
changing the tone and as they note
shifts attention to voices already
present please join me in warmly
welcoming Sean Shay
[Applause]
thank you Eric
that was very thoughtful and I think you
made us sound very thoughtful and very
I'm very flattered we're very flattered
yeah hey speak for us yeah thank you for
having us it's really amazing to be able
to speak here and we've known so many
great colleagues and friends that have
studied here so it's especially special
for us to be at Ohio State yeah we
appreciate the invitation so hello and
thank you for being patient as we cross
those inevitable technical difficulties
and thank you Eric again for inviting us
to come speak as part of the bomber
series and for everyone to everyone here
I'm gonna start off the talk and then
Troy and I are gonna hand it back and
forth it's actually a pretty rare
experience that we get to speak about
our work at the same time so you guys
are watching a kind of performance art
project unfold in front of you so you
can see how we're not really good at
performance so but it's it's nice this
is maybe the
or fourth time that we've ever spoken
together and it gives us an opportunity
to construct a dialogue around the work
and so we we see it as a chance to do
that and that's kind of reflected in the
way in which we've set up the talk
tonight around this idea of blanking
which it's a kind of term that we've
landed upon because of this notion of
blinks and so which are used in metal
fabrication like blank keys right you go
to the you go to the hardware store and
you get a kind of approximate thing that
is your key and then you have it cut so
it specifically becomes your key in
which the material is shaped
approximately and informed it to unique
objects right and so I think in some
ways that's a little bit of an analogy
for how we also meet together around the
same work but kind of trying to figure
out what some of these ideas are and so
we we have these ideas that have emerged
out of the work and I say you know Eric
mentioned things happening post building
and that's really important is that
there's a kind of thinking process that
happens as we assess what it is that
we've done and we think of these as kind
of approximate containers for recurring
ideas and interests that we visit and
revisit but are also adapted they're
kind of recurring ideas and there's
things that we learn from our own work
but they're also aspirations that's how
I would say so there are ways in which
we can point the work to try to be
something else and we adapt them as we
continue in our practice and engage new
ideas and new kinds of work but another
play off of this term is the notion of
blanking like at the blank page or
having it like blanking out not blanking
out in in like a drinking way but
drawing a blank that's what I mean
drawing a blank and like the beginning
of a project as a moment when you have a
kind of blank moment looking at the
blank page and trying to find like see
in the kind of blankness something that
interests us so so we think about the
recurrent ideas or interests in our work
to be like blanks I would say a specific
but soft around the edges and open to
change and the development of work
itself is an adaptation of hunches and
into specific responses specific
interventions and unique findings so you
might think of this as like you know in
your ear in a school of architecture
sometimes we talk about what your
concept is or what your argument is and
so we're always kind of fashioning what
those things are for us and and kind of
pushing the work along so part of this
is kind of the formation of a common
language by which we can both define and
kind of propel the work and specifically
the naming of ideas or a series of terms
that becomes semi specific as I said
containers for these ideas and they're
not so much definitions as they are
vectors defined by somewhat leading
questions the vocabulary of soft terms
these are kind of current set of lengths
from which we attempt to define the
projects and in the case of today to
organize our project around our projects
around certain ideas about building
aesthetics or president ation people the
city and other things we care about that
are more explicitly architectural and so
we're trying something and hopefully it
works to introduce and intersperse this
presentation of our work with some of
these to have some of these terms to
situate the ideas
within frames okay so the first term is
entropy we've had we've been working
we've done some work in Detroit Marfa
and Houston and while each of these
places is quite distinct they share a
kind of remoteness and by remoteness I
don't necessarily mean that they're far
from urban centers although in the case
of a place like Marfa it is far from an
urban center but they're also remote
from what an ideal notion of what
urbanism might be you could say that
Houston is very far from Rome which is a
kind of traditional city that we talked
about in schools or architecture and so
ideas that are kind of less parented but
places that are less paradigmatic in
architecture but we've been focused on
are things like the leakiness of these
urban conditions this dispersion of some
of these landscapes the informal quality
of these places and so for us these
ideas are these conditions are grouped
under the idea of entropy where the
things that look one way might be open
to many interpretations and where the
appropriate interventions are not always
self-evident so we often use images to
kind of encapsulate ideas in our work if
for some reason you can't hear me just
somebody say something because my
microphone is wandering a little bit hmm
so you know we often use images and
capsulate ideas or kind of read images
as a way of slowing down but visually
allowing us to kind of do a kind of
thought process where we can explain
something that is maybe something that
we see rather than something that can be
defined so this this image of the Eiffel
Tower is kind of one that stayed with us
over the last ten years and you it's an
image from the Eiffel Tower looking down
and what you can see you see people you
see
running across the space waiting to get
in you see them talking to each other
and you see that the ground is a kind of
picture frame in this point of view and
the people are kind of unevenly
distributed but they're ordered you can
trace lines and identify directional
clumps you're in the shadow of the tower
and in the way the form of the tower is
actually the subject of the photo even
though the tower itself is not in the
photo
so what's foregrounded in this photo is
not the city or architecture as artifact
but its activity or a moment in the life
in its life or process and we're
interested in how buildings organize or
make possible those processes or to put
it another way and this brings us back
to the idea of entropy borrow from
Robert Smithson we are interested in how
buildings collaborate with atropine and
how that produces localized order or
platforms that can support different
modes of inhabitation or use and so in
this point of view the lines are lines
so there's a kind of way in which the
thing that is people queuing also
becomes a kind of object that you can
draw or a kind of representational thing
and the image becomes a kind of model
for representation or kind of drawing by
which we can visualize these that's a
temporal forms that are created by
architecture
so while we're in Detroit this idea of
entropy was paired with one of blankness
the lights oh yeah that's a good song so
this is sorry this is an image of Marfa
I didn't I missed forward into it
so in Detroit this idea of entropy was
paired with one of blankness or the void
where we were trying to see the spaces
left by removal of and not defined by
lack so we worked we were working in
this area of Detroit where there was a
lot of fun building the building was
taken down and we didn't want to see
them as spaces where it was empty or
that they needed to be filled but we
wanted to see these spaces is kind of
partially prepared sites and so do you
want to talk about this but yeah yeah
yes so this was an important project for
us actually it was very formative moment
when the back in 2009 you can see when
our practice was starting and we really
wanted to look at Detroit as though it
was a paradigm attic problem a problem
of the tension between absence and
presence that we deal with in a lot of
cities that are exurban cities and not
so much a narrative about the kind of
failure of Detroit or like the failure
of the Fortis project in a way and so
you know we think that how do we make a
way of seeing both the absence but also
the potential of a prepared site or what
we imagined is a kind of partially
prepared site and so we began to
actually draw which is actually how we
start a lot of our projects and we
started drawing both what we could see
but also things that we couldn't see we
introduced the drawings of footprints of
the buildings of course and layers of
property lines but also layers of
vectors and a kind of scaffolding that
ultimately developed into both a kind of
plan of analysis what we call the kind
of minor plan as Eric referred to in his
generous introduction but a plan that
would allow us to go speculate
analyze what was possible and in this
way you know we feel like our ways of
drawing are also in ways that we begin
to see the site and this means both
drawing documenting recording and even
over drawing sometimes the kind of space
and so what you're really saying is we
develop the kind of strategy of objects
so thinking about objects
programmatically as well as formally in
a way to have a very light footprint and
to reimagine an organization of space
around territories that were outside of
some of these boundaries that we had
ruth through drawn in the initial
diagram and boundaries that were set up
first for a city that was basically
oriented towards the street of mono
directional tightly packed houses and
what we ended up with through these kind
of drawings this is a plant perspective
something kind of like to say the eiffel
tower drawing where we wanted to treat
the building and the ground or the
figure in the ground equally so we cut
away some of what we might imagine
building the kind of rendered is ground
and see how these spaces could be op
organized and operate in a kind of three
dimensional matrix no longer a matrix
that is only oriented towards the
streets but one that permeates the
buildings and we call this way of seeing
the the the city is a kind of spine sure
this is a project we call sponge
urbanism and you can see we use
perspectives like this tilted
perspective in a way that's both
familiar but also
in a way a ghost-like perspective that
kind of floats above the city and in
this perspective the thing I want to
point out and see if this works
do you see that at school so we actually
had an opportunity to test one of these
objects and our work is always
oscillating between analyzing and
projecting through drawing but also
testing in any way we can and you know
with sometimes modest means these ideas
so this is a this is a house this is
actually Ron Street and this is a house
that was acquired by Rossum with a group
of fellows in Michigan that now part of
the group called team and Katie Newell
who took the photograph for five hundred
dollars in an auction in 2009 and there
was a local arts group in the
neighborhood that worked with work with
the group on acquiring the house and
each group of us took a portion of the
house and tested an idea on it and our
project we tested was what we call the
kind of seed or the kind of seed of
sponge urbanism was an idea about
opening up the project you can see can
you see might I can't see it anymore
anyway you can see the pink the pink in
the image is is the process the project
and it basically cut diagonally through
the house again reorient in the
direction of the house from the street
in this case to the sky into the roof
scape creating a kind of diagonal room
it both became a kind of Lantern and a
kind of stair and the project we
fabricated it with again a relatively
modest budget out of these CNC panels
that a plywood and fabricated it on-site
to make this bridge and there was a kind
of Plexiglas slumped window at the top
that would allow you to kind of poke
your head out
the project was a the project was both
again this kind of stared that would
bring you up to the second floor of the
house allow you to see over the roof
scape but also brought light down in the
house there was no electricity in the
house at the time the copper wires have
all been taken in the neighborhood and
so this is a way to reimagine Lee used
to house it was also a kind of screening
room for for the use of the kind of arts
organization that that we were
collaborating with and so you can see
the kind of view up through the house
from the the garden next door and so we
were invited to reimagine this
installation for the 13th international
architectural exhibition at the Venice
Biennale and when David Chipperfield got
in touch with us part of the problem was
how to realize this project in a 15th
century Venetian rope factory which is
what the Arsenal a is and you're not
allowed to touch any of the walls it's a
historic building you can't touch the
ceiling you can only touch the floor and
of course our project is incredibly
site-specific and he needs the walls
that was the whole idea so we we had to
reimagine as an autonomous object and
the way we began to think through that
was was through a series of panels these
23 pieces that we we imagine it's kind
of set and we have 23 independent panels
that we're all made of a bio resin
fiberglass again seams see out of foam
and built kind of like surfboards and
you can see an image of you can see an
image of Rosalind actually fabricating
the surfboards here and in this we also
had to use color instead
light because also if you guys ever
exhibit in the arson alley you know the
light is very precious to her there's
only certain light bulbs you can use and
there's only a certain amount of power
so again something that was a design to
be a lantern and had to fill this kind
of dark space in this case we use this
kind of salmon color that created a
presence in the gallery that transcended
the kind of need for that much light but
it still created a kind of space in the
gallery that there were places where you
could sneak away this is our friend
Elena peeking out of the space and kind
of getting introducing that kind of
diagonal logic and letting you peek
above the rafters of the arson alley
when you're inside of it and so we had
this opportunity to test this idea at a
range of scales this idea of how we can
play with a very fixed set of objects to
maximize a kind of relational logic both
between the site and the place and in
this case we tested it in a this is a
group we worked with at Virginia
Commonwealth University and we made a
series of discrete objects to look at
the question of monumentality in
Richmond Virginia which if you guys know
the history of monuments in Richmond
Virginia is a incredibly charged topic
especially these days and this is back
in 2012 and we looked at how to occupy
and create a frame for an alley that was
forgotten along the Main Street in
Richmond and so you can see the kind of
testing of both I kind of set and an
object and the contention between those
two things that we were exploring here
and the one kind of anecdote about this
project is that we were working with VCU
fashion and graphic design and interior
design students who were used to working
at one-to-one scale and they really
weren't used to a lot of the devices
projection and drawing that we even
described you know that you all take for
granted in your education so you can
actually see that we had to work these
are full-scale concrete sorry about
concrete cardboard objects that we
constructed and we the
students so jackets basically out of
fabric for the objects you can see this
fabric here and and they were very
comfortable working with the sewing
machine and the draping the objects like
there are mannequins and we ended up
actually fabricating this out of out of
sewing in a week and but it created this
very bright vibrant color that you can
even get in this kind of image because
it's actually a fabric wrapped object
yeah and so this this leads us to the
kind of term that the kind of imagines
was one of our blanks but it's the idea
pieces and the pieces really refer to
how we think about sets and families of
forms and we explore these families of
forms that will come up in our in our
work over the course of the the evening
but we explore these families of form
again and again and again to see how we
can produce something that both has a
kind of autonomy of parts but also has a
kind of relational logic amongst the
family of forms okay so with these
pieces I'm going to show you we kind of
played around with this when we Eric
mentioned the ps1 project so this is in
2017 we tried to kind of play with these
the pieces would be the pink things here
these assemblages of these pieces that
can produce kind of relationships with
each other and with its surroundings but
but also construct atmospheres within
them so I think if you think about what
we were doing at the Biennale as like
breaking up this form and then building
it back up together with pieces it was
kind of a formal study you know that had
certain like ideas about occupation and
like orientation and we're kind of
interested in how we could be a little
bit freer with putting these things
together to kind of conduct an
atmosphere and especially if you know
the ps1 project basically it's a kind of
design within a courtyard
of an old school in Queens that then
gets used to hosts it's a kind of
atmospheric transformation of the
courtyard that becomes a backdrop for a
party that happens every week during the
summertime and so the idea is that it is
this kind of festive place so you can
see here the plan the project is made up
of kind of 23:23 inflatable these are 23
inflatable objects here that hugged the
wall and then some lights that are
represented here in the silver lines and
then sand colored sand on the ground and
then these benches here that these
people are lying on that as we moved the
benches it activates a pump that blows
up the inflatable objects and the
inflatable objects kind of move around
and then the idea is also these lights
and I'll show you this in a video in a
second so you can see then arrayed
around the walls there and then the the
set of the stripes of sand and the idea
also this is kind of bringing back the
entropy idea is that as the courtyard
was occupied over the course of the
summer that it would become more and
more and more disordered and so in the
end you would get this kind of swirling
messy mixture of pink and yellow and
white sand that was a kind of index of
all of the things that had happened
there and we are kind of playing with
this we're playing with our
representation here where
we're trying to conduct this kind of
creepy a little eerie atmosphere and
here you can see the kind of finite
element analysis of the individual
objects which would actually be finite
in terms of their set
but produce a sense of difference as
they are aggregated so there would be
six standard pieces and in their
combination it would produce a unique
environment and then here's a drawing of
the the pump as it's connected
connecting the benches the rocking
benches to the individual objects here's
some model photos and here's a kind of
night image and I'm gonna show you I
hope this works it might not
watch my trick
my clothes
was there sound on here yeah thank you
there's no sound
there that's that sound yeah
it's there it's just very quiet anyway
it's just in like kind of like eerie
atmospheric music but I think one of the
things that we're thinking about with
this is being a little bit freer with
how we identify a set of forms and a set
of elements or textures and then
building them up around a kind of
tableau
[Music]
[Music]
or there it is still playing
and you know making these objects in the
way just large enough but they're kind
of like elephant legs they're they're
kind of inhabitants that are inside this
garden
[Music]
and we work on the
that you might this
this video
starting our continuous elevation and so
you know again in architecture school I
guess I could say this but nerdily it
like it snaps between being a kind of
validation and then fall into
perspective it's a for us you know we're
asked to do things or something like ps1
and this is where the bright comes in
where you know we don't really do videos
overheard and we don't really you know
do interactivity which is something they
really wanted like interactivity in a
certain kind of definition that you can
imagine architecture and so things like
the sand or the way we made the video or
the way we made these funny inflatable
objects that would like get like loose
and blow around the wind when the subway
joke live is like some way in which we
took that right things we look at it
adapted it to the sort of problem that
was at hand
yeah and then I think also the idea of
like pieces or sometimes we use the word
sets or you could say like they form is
kind of palette that can be layered up
into an atmosphere or an environment
that then is going to be have the kind
of complexities of a full environment
where it will produce surprises and
simply because of the fact that it's out
of our control you know and so working
up towards something that then goes into
the world
I think also like we were trying to do
something and half because we you know
you can't really do we want to win maybe
we're probably not gonna win so you just
do something that like it's gonna be
kind of fun we could do this part of the
rejected exhibition around the corner
yeah cinematic debut of that video also
the only other people have seen are the
border yeah so I think Rosalyn wants me
to take on what I see is the political
dimension of this so the context of this
project in the blow up the wall and the
reason we decided to work on the wall as
the site for the project when the ps1
ask you I could talk about this project
problem POS one asks you to do these
kind of project they say make something
colorful and make it up there like that
was kind of like the direct direction
and they really want you to do a canopy
project but this was we found out that
we were finalists for this competition
the day after the 2016 presidential
election and we had to present to the
board of the MoMA the day after the
inauguration of the current president
and so it was a really weird time in the
middle of the winter to plan a summer
party and plan something colorful and up
there for a summer party and so you know
this was the beginning of a conversation
that probably you all are like deeply
engaged and now in your education that
maybe take for granted but we were
trying to figure out how to transition
from being asked to do a summer party to
take on what architects know about we
know about walls and we know walls can
do more than the rhetoric was unveiling
at the time and so we thought maybe
there was a little bit of
tongue-in-cheek part of this that we
didn't really present that had to do
with actually you know how to think of
the wall as a side of exchange and the
kind of blow up the wall kind of emerge
from that
okay okay
so in some ways it folds right into the
next idea which is this stage because I
said I talked about the kind of tableau
and like when we talked about kind of
following the elevation of the wall all
the way around and we've also talked
about the picture plane the ground
becoming the picture plane so there's a
kind of idea about a stage or a
proscenium you know like like well
actually the way that you guys are
looking at us right now it's like this
is this is a kind of stage or this is a
proscenium and so it produces this kind
of uni-directional focus right and what
happens within that frame and like does
that frame always belong to something
heroic like a drama that's out unfolding
on a stage or can we think of the
construction of environments and
buildings and spaces for people as
spaces for the incidental or spaces for
kind of everyday life and I think you
know the pursuing of mister - that's an
archetypal piece of architecture in that
way but it is a kind of or form let's
say it's like one that appears again and
again and it is both a building and an
organization and so it's one that I
think we we think about a lot and it
intersects with some of those ideas that
we've come across that we're introduced
already where you could even say that
the pieces or are they characters or are
they figures or
the animals in the garden in this kind
of frontal space so if ps1 is the kind
of tableau in this I'm trying to sound a
little bit yeah there's a kind of idea
of the way in which this stage has a
direction and it implicates this kind of
its revealing and it also implicates a
kind of moving subject and it becomes
also a way you can imagine the kind of
focus and the the kind of movement as if
you imagine that the area the focus is
not fixed like in a stage but it starts
to move around it also becomes a way in
which you can organize a site and that's
kind of what we're thinking about here
with the kind of way in which the
circulation move through the site
produces many stages or kind of
locations that then become these nodes
so this is a speculative project that we
did for a pop music Center in Kaohsiung
in Taiwan and we worked with Albert Pope
Choi's colleague and our friend and
mentor on this we were interested in
this kind of interplay between movement
form program and
escape and so exploding some of the
ideas about focus into a kind of larger
set of criteria and how these things
might actually start to be lets say
choreographed together in a way that
starts to organize a site so this is at
an old waterfront edge so you know you
have the situation where certain spaces
of industry are decommissioned so this
is a space like that in the counseling
port and it's also at the end of a river
which you can see coming in on the upper
left of the image and the project was
really more landscape than it was
building so the challenge for us was to
have a strategy that could foreground
the openness and the landscape while
also directing the distribution of
building form and how to bring those
together with the context in a manner
that both filtered it as well as
bringing people through in a way to
bringing people through in a way that
was considered so this is a these
diagrams show the ways in which we
organized this site and using a set of
50-meter spheres that are packed
throughout in a grid in order to kind of
bridge the building scale and the
landscape scale and the spheres are a
mediating representation that organized
both the metrics but also set a kind of
grain across the site and then through
this we used as a way to align movement
and also make spatial relationships and
it became also I mean you guys can call
this like a diagram right as a
generative tool that we imposed on the
site to mediate the existing conditions
and then project new realities so it was
a way of using a single drawing to
a wide range of criteria from making
neighborhoods as you can see here to
designating building sites and then
organizing the circulation so that comes
together and that kind of final drawing
you see there and then you can see how
these different parts relate the
drawings and the diagram set kind of
loose but deliberate internal
relationships along a circulatory
infrastructure which is kind of curly
curly Q line that runs all the way
through and then wraps around the site
so here's a kind of schematic drawing of
the where the plan went and then here's
a kind of view of the site as we're
projecting it and we as a way of testing
so this is a little bit about process
right like as a way of testing what the
kind of kind of final outcome is or
might be is to kind of take a view that
doesn't really diagram so it's like what
does this look like as a landscape and
in this view we're looking for one edge
and imagining kind of all these layers
of things kind of coming through from
the the wetlands the beach the water
Plaza auditorium and then the city
beyond and then the individual buildings
become these kind of episodic things
that bleed off of the edges and so
really trying to produce that this kind
of immersive understanding of what this
thing might be within the larger context
of the city
and then the night render shows is kind
of the kind of surfaces that urban water
Plaza and then this forms change at
night right because they're defined by
the kind of fenestration or the way in
which the figures glow and then the
building is going to drop back into the
background and are you're the kind of
reflection on the water also becomes
part of the part
design and that kind of does some
celebrity more things
Taichung is next yeah yeah so you know
we've been able to explore this idea of
the kind of mega forms that are
organized around a series of basically a
parapet a peripatetic subject or the
kind of moving subject in several other
projects this is a Central Library and
Museum project that we did a competition
for really in our practice in Taichung
where the colorful objects or the kind
of museum that drops out of the
trajectories that define the library as
a collective project and this is like
we've done a lot of testing of ideas
again through drawing this is a bike
hotel and hostel in the very high
mountains of Taiwan Taiwan has the
highest mountains in Asia outside the
Himalayas alright so this is the very
very high mountains of Taiwan there's a
kind of trajectory here that actually
defines both the kind of the hot springs
baths and the kind of lodging in between
the the tea plantation and the sight
cedar forest above and so this idea of
again the moving subject out of
directory the moving subject on a
trajectory on the hill is something that
we were actually able to explore in this
project it's under construction now that
house we were asked to design about
three years ago by an anthropologist and
a playwright they wanted a house that
they could spend time in the mountains
this is the Blue Ridge Mountains of
Virginia and then ultimately it would
become a place for playwrights to have a
retreat for incoming decades and so the
house is a series of soft forms that are
set against the kind of soft forms of
the hillside and the plan and the plan
again is organized around 120 foot long
hallway this is a 2700 foot square foot
house which is relatively modest in size
and you can see every single room
is actually has three walls and it's a
sort of object along this trajectory did
either flip-flops with a down the hill
and and towards the view or flips up the
hill and is embedded in the hill and a
kind of more intimate setting towards
the hill and so you know you have the
master bedroom the kitchen the living
room and some outdoor decks that spill
down the house and so we have a little
video we were just up there last two
weeks ago you can show the video where
we talk this is the framing which you
know we always explain everything as
being very simple you probably have lots
of architects I stand up here and tell
you that their projects it's very simple
so this is very simple it's essentially
a single pitch this just this is flat
and it's a single pitch that has just a
little tiny round part just at the top
little and that little gable is what
produces the kind of undulation and the
the angling of the pitch is what
produces that kind of asked that wave
like folding that you see in the
elevation and you can see as as we move
up in the framing this is downhill and
this is uphill you can see those spaces
along this 120 foot long hallway that's
the steel for the balcony that form both
these kind of intimate gardens close to
the house and then set you up for these
views but I think you're gonna see in a
second down the hill and across the site
toward the mountains so we built this
all the two-by-four construction and
this is just 2 by tens with some LDLs
the long spans
it's very modest project in terms of the
price per square foot it's it's just
plywood and and two by fours and it's
going to have a Eva strap on the outside
Barban windows so I get it's a I just
say that to say it's about it's using
all the techniques and tools and we have
to do this in a lot of our projects of a
kind of typical Virginia house but we're
just organizing the geometry slightly
differently and
these are the kind of surprises and
we'll see this in some of our projects
that start to happen it's not really
conceived this way but when you start to
see it from this view towards the
landscape you realize that it actually
echoes some of the forms in the
landscape as a kind of landscape itself
and that's you know for us we kind of
find these things in the project as we
move through it so our team is working
on our drone flying skills yeah we
didn't fly the drone I don't know if we
can actually do that it's quite
difficult actually well you guys
probably can do it anyway I think it you
have to play first-person shooter games
I think is like some sort of like weird
intro and a drone flying or something I
can't do it anyway I don't play those
games but uh anyway so this is the
vehicle across the across from the
master through the kitchen to the living
room where you see the vegetable garden
would be there our clients as a gardener
and going as program of each one of
these gardens that are close to the
house this is a view looking out towards
the view out towards the view you can
see the kind of ghosted in buildings
that are uphill from the master to the
kitchen to the living room and the view
is beyond and this is you know you this
is you got a sense of the view from the
drone but this is sort of the experience
of the house that we're creating a house
where you have both the kind of
connection to landscape through the
through the individual views but also
the connection to the collective through
this mister ejector II and so this
brings us to a project that we were
asked to do in 2013 we started this
project and so four gentlemen that are
we're in the early 30s at the time in
Houston approaches about doing a music
venue in Houston and we made some
sketches for them and thought that we
would never see them again
and they came back to six months with
the property and with some money that
they had raised around in the community
and that became the start of what became
a kind of epic to produce this privately
funded Civic project which is the white
of Music Hall I just realized why we put
those slides together is because of this
idea of collapsing the view into the
project itself and if you see here why
don't use O'Call is kind of situated to
see downtown Houston so that that's the
area in front of number one that's
you're looking kind of not from the
other side of number one South across
the bayou and downtown's over here and
so when you're watching a when you're
watching when you're attending a concert
you actually get there you get Houston
as a kind of backdrop there and so this
idea of also thinking about how you
collapse the kind of Greater area into a
project that's maybe smaller than that
is a way of making the project big in a
way or like making it make a gesture to
something that's kind of larger than
itself
here yeah so the next this next term we
have is simple and it has to do with
unlike things together and as we how do
we kind of manage to put together these
things that are kind of unlike and kind
of maybe sometimes in kind of
contradiction and so I mean in some ways
that's why don't commute a call is
actually one building but it's also a
campus it's a campus that includes new
buildings as well as buildings that
existed that have been adapted some of
which have been kind of cut open and
converted and some of which are have
been risked like adapted to new uses
while maintaining there I kind of
original look and so it's a and then
some things are kind of like the stage
which has the feeling of a temporary
structure but is actually terminates and
so you have a kind of range of unlike
things that kind of fit together in this
is a kind of amalgam right and so this
idea of like dealing with dis junctions
and gaps and like a kind of full of
seams thing that we maybe have a way of
conceptualizing a collection of things
that are not like alike instead of
worrying about how to get them to all
work together and so there are different
ways in which these things can be in
relation to each other
and so this includes you know site work
and parking and outdoor stages and what
you don't see here are kind of the
relation to the high could bike trail
and so all these things kind of bundled
together and that becomes a kind of
urban idea about how these individual
pieces they need to have a larger set of
stuff and this is what
for us at white oh you know we often
talk about it this kind of becomes a
visible piece of the of the project
let me see yeah so the largest piece is
that is that new building and then you
can see here towards one of the parts of
the project that has sorry I'm a little
bit lost here yeah this is some of the
other parts of the project is looking
away it's stunning kind of where the
stages and then looking towards it's
number two basically that we're looking
at and so you can see kind of like
there's like a little bit but this is
basically a nice house that has been
converted from an old shed on site and
this is an example of one of the pieces
that we cut open and opened up to bring
air in and also make a kind of outdoor
venue and then you can see the river
tower at the back and then you can see
here us kind of destroy on a ladder
cutting out the shape there that then
becomes this shape here
and so here yeah you can see the skyline
as connects to the Bayou and the
amphitheater and the main hall so those
are kind of million pieces and here's a
kind of construction photo so you can
see the extensive site work that happens
during the construction of the piece and
then here's the main venue yeah so I
mean I think that the last team for us
the paint was how do you do ground up
rock and roll menu because nobody does
ground up rock and roll venues mostly if
you're gonna work in a rock and roll
venue you work in an old warehouse or
factory or I'm sure like in in this part
of the Midwest there's lots of like
really great old buildings to make into
rock and roll venues and that's like you
know heart of rock and roll is like in
this area of the country and houston we
build everything ground up it's almost
like Rockbrook crop rotation you like
tear it down and you build it again in
like 20 years and so we had the charge
of building a kind of rock venue that it
would have that kind of authenticity
with with the kinds of performers that
we were trying to attract here this was
an independent venue live nation
controlled the landscape of Houston at
the time in terms of bookings and this
wasn't gonna be an independently booked
music venue and so we worked with
materials again from the neighborhood
this is this is simple
hardy basically hardy panel this is
cedar
this is polycarbonate and steel we try
to use these very elemental materials
changing scale changing relationship to
them but a relatively modest and on the
inside you can see the performance space
was lined with the cedar here and it was
some sort of mix between you know we
worked with the production manager who
does the sound
whose amazing dining tanooki and he you
know he was always accusing us of not
being rock'n'roll enough he mean like
kissing caring about what things look
like too much and or not being practical
enough like making sure these speakers
there were a fifteen hundred pounds like
actually have a hole in the ceiling
anyway but he um we worked on this venue
with these very simple spacing of the of
the cedar which our client wanted to be
somewhere between a kind of a barn and
in Radio City Music Hall and so anyway
it's there but so what we actually as we
worked with Jaffe Holden and there's two
thousand square feet of acoustic
insulation in this all of the spacing of
these different wood panels is slightly
different as you go back it goes from a
tighter space in the front to loose your
space in the back so that the room
doesn't drop a note through the analysis
and when we first worked with Jaffe
Holden they told us you know it doesn't
matter they're gonna be pumping so much
electrical energy into this room it kind
of doesn't matter what you do to it but
when we were done the Jaffe Holden said
you know actually this is tuned so you
could play acoustic instruments or use
it for human voice and Tim the week he
called us when they first hooked up the
clair system and and did the first test
and he said I don't know what you guys
did but I almost cried when I heard the
sound it sounded so good so we were we
were you know playing between those
kinds of audiences of trying to make a
kind of space to be authentic for the
musicians and and we go around town now
we meet all kinds of people that perform
there or worked there as as the kind of
people that do the labor there and it's
a kind of temple for music in Houston
and you can see so this is what we
really made the space for it has a venue
for four thousand people outside people
thought that you couldn't be outside
along the bayous in Houston in the
summertime because it's so hot
and Houston is coming back to the values
and this project is about coming back to
the bayous and coming back to the
landscape and thinking about the bayous
as sites for the collective in Houston
which which it hasn't been for a while
this wood on the outside is also for
acoustic attenuation on the exterior and
we design these balconies to really
flatten the experience between the crowd
that's inhabiting the the balconies and
the stage so it really feels like an
outdoor urban room when you're there and
you have this sense of not being spread
out in the field but you're actually in
a kind of theater that has a kind of
verticality yeah and I think that like I
think like and like we like these views
because in some ways the building starts
to disappear a little bit or starts to
like drop back as a kind of it almost is
more like what we're playing with this
idea of a kind of geology where it's
more like a mountain
maybe that is rising up behind people
and so it becomes something that they
can turn their backs to but we can they
can kind of sense that it's there
and then looking again at also the way
this is a construction photo of the
project and thinking about the city is
is kind of this is almost kind of a
decimal image but in this kind of
geological way of thinking about the
building that like things like street
lamps and electrical wires all become
kind of vernacular or native objects
that are natural to the site and
thinking about the project as kind of
whether it's a kind of play of like
inside and outside - you called it like
an outdoor room but then also in some
ways it becomes this kind of like land
formation and then there's a kind of
blurring between the artificiality of
putting a building in but also it being
kind of at home amongst each other kind
of like Sydney - try this in Houston I
mean Houston like probably parts of
Columbus outside of the
nineteenth-century core is a city of
organized by a loose affiliation of
spaces and forms it's not a city that
has an urban legibility that that is
familiar to us as architects in like the
19th century urban fabric and and so
this project was about the finding that
sense of place you know figuring out how
to use both physical form but also
atmospheric and other kinds of
organizational logics to create a place
and we bring people all the time when
they come to Houston to visit this to
see a show and it's amazing when it's
filled with folks because it does have
on earth it does have legible urban
logic but it's not like the legibility
that we've experienced in in more
traditional cities and so this is the
more geologic presence that Rosen's
referring to from the Main Street that
it's placed on and this is another shot
of the crowd yeah
yeah so this is um the final project
that we're gonna show tonight and this
is a project that again began for us
quite a ways back in 2014 and it's a
project where we were approached by a
client we actually used the office in
this building in the back this is an
existing building we approached our
client who was our landlord who was
really interested in creating a space
there was a kind of salon like space
which she could explore her work as a
curatorial in a curatorial practice that
was between the kind of salon and a
gallery and she could show the work and
have conversations around the work of
artists that she she supports and she's
in conversation with and and that works
she calls trans art and that translate
for her is the exploration of externa
graphic practice or art that looks at
its own making as part of the subject of
the art it sounds maybe that's more
technical it is but it's anyway it's
also very beautiful work so we so this
is how we got that it has the name trans
art and so this space actually is broken
into three types of spaces there's a
space in the front on the street that's
a more traditional kind of gallery space
where you could show work that has
that's well lit and has like there's
space along the back that is a darker
gallery that is for more mixed-media but
it also has enough light that it could
you could show all kinds of work there
and then there's a score in the middle
that is for a library a kind of seminar
room and has a lot of the support
functions the project and also the
office where where our clients are
picking works yeah and so you can see
here in the section how that's reflected
it's a relatively simple diagram and we
like these kind of simple diagrams this
way to start projects and that that
simple diagram you can see the kind of
open space here and that
backroom with the service wall and this
kind of layering of space in the middle
that makes the core that you move up
around and we've went back to this
question of the panel in the set as a
way to think about the facade and so the
facade is broken up into this idea of a
panel ization and we worked through
several material strategies to achieve
this and ultimately ended up with a more
traditional stucco panel but you can see
in the penalisation there was a
construction of a kind of rule set and
then a kind of deviation from the rule
set which was the kind of peeling back
or the kind of the lightening of the
corner so you can peek in or peek around
and it produces this effect like this so
this is a 3,000 square-foot gallery you
can see sometimes these get washed out
so it's like it was the same-sized
engineer house
it's homeless the same size of gin yeah
and and you can see these kind of these
kind of curved windows that like peel
back to let the light in this is the
space on top we actually ended up
building this building out of wood
actually these kind of like heavy
Timbers this is all engineered lumber
again we're working with really modest
means with all these early projects
which is to say we originally designed a
project like this out of Steel and you
would think maybe it needs to be steel
because there's only this much wall that
like goes from the site grounds to the
30 feet there but we didn't have the
money to do steel when we priced it so
we were sent back to the drawing board
and we designed these incredibly thick
wood walls with these massive lvls to
construct the piece which actually
turned out to be fortuitous because also
this is the context of houston and you
guys might have this experience although
there's maybe more kinds of
manufacturing know-how here where we
imagine you know coming out of school
and knowing what we know that we're
gonna take a window like this and it's
gonna be produced it with a CNC machine
or we're gonna take the drawings of
making the computer and that's how it's
gonna be made but they would take our um
they would take our drawings and they
would project them on the wall with a
beamer and like trace them with a pencil
and then weld them together to form
these shapes and these are the this is
amazing maestro of of sheet metal that
actually constructed these sheet metal
details I mean this is a knife edge that
goes you know from the top with the
stucco flip-flopping again technical
term on both sides and and he's
constructing this knife edge on the site
and we were able to get this detail
because we got permission from the
engineer to actually carve these wood
beams on the site so we can achieve this
detailing and so there's a kind of
balance between our imagination of the
tools that we we know and the tools that
were using and how they're actually
getting deployed on the site and so this
is the elevation from the street it
presents this kind of you know beautiful
kind of blankness with just this corner
peeled back so you can see you know into
the main gallery in the front on the
inside there's a series of layered
spaces this is from the front gallery
looking back towards the library there's
a series of layered spaces for the kind
of entry area the stair that takes you
up into a kind of seminar room and then
the third level one of these windows
actually goes to a writing space for the
owner and the other to a roof deck and
this is a this is an elevator that works
like the thing that you deposit your
check out at the bank if you guys still
go to a bag of thirty yeah man this is
like generational problem but anyway but
anyway sucks you up and takes you to the
users air pressure to actually our
atmosphere pressure to move and then you
can see here up into our office this is
a custom glass desk that we designed for
office right in kind of seminar room and
how the space is layer and there's this
wind has like a perfect little window
shade that they covers that windows so
this gallery can get darker our work you
know Eric refer to this a little bit in
the UM in the introduction but our work
we tend to take some of these very
simple diagrams and introduce maybe
idiosyncratic moments but this is a
plaster room that's actually shaped like
a kind of egg that was again made in a
collaboration with a local artist where
we see and see the the the wood panels
and a local artist did the
Italian plaster finish so our owner
wanted a place that she could retreat
and have intimate conversations with
people or maybe read a book or something
like that and of course host people and
this is the kitchen for the space that's
hidden in the service wall in the
gallery in the back and the Gannett
gallery in the front from the inside
where you can see the kind of windows
there's did a lot of different work this
work was a part of the photography that
we did with Naju Tabata but a lot of
different kinds of work have been
supported in this gallery this is not a
commercial gallery this is a space for
non artists that aren't necessarily
commercially viable but it's provoked a
really interesting conversation in the
art community Houston
it's very adjacent to the Menil
collection which you might know which is
a completely different scale and type of
operation and so you can see here in
this slide this is a slide that we're
going to transition to our conclusion on
but you know the one thing we want to
point on this slide is you have the kind
of rarefied autonomous object that we're
we're invested in and in in negotiating
through our drawing and through our work
but it really opens up into this kind of
landscape that we've described our
practice is situated between two
paradigm addict cities between New York
which is the parabolic city of
nineteenth-century
walkable
oh and paradoxical kind of 19th century
Walker bird ISM and Houston which is
really the paramedic exurban city of the
car and of a kind of dislocated spaces
and you can see this image so we have
this like perfect gallery like you know
I'll call perfect
gallery they've constructed next to more
traditional Houston bungalows it's
actually a gallery for neon signs and
there this was a halfway house that was
torn down during construction is just a
gravel lot now and this is kind of back
of a falling-down apartment building
that again is practically across the
street from the manila foundation in
Houston so this is the kind of uneven
landscape that we're working in and it
makes us think about things like wonder
and for us you know we both also grew up
in the suburbs and you know we think
about things like wonder not only is
just producing novel things for novels
sake but ways in which we can take the
kind of prosaic landscapes that most the
world has produced is is living in now
and how we can reframe those landscapes
and we think about the potential for
those landscapes to be revelatory and so
moments like this in the house become
are not about the house but in the
gallery become important to us where
this is something we kind of thought at
the back side of the house in a way it's
against the neon gallery but it produces
again almost this kind of funny
lanky of geologic form that emerges from
that landscape we call it the whale yeah
we call it the whale the kind of whale
view of the project where it's not this
delicate a highly articulate facade
language but actually this kind of more
massive whale like the kind of facade of
the music venue and so we often think
again you see through the lecture
through these kind of associative logics
of photography and so you know we think
about you know the legacy of work like
the photography of Lewis faults in this
kind of corner condition this happens to
be a vine California the kind of suburb
X urban landscape par excellence and
kind of a geologic stone that we found
in the Chihuahuan Desert near Marfa that
we move around the office too much and
and luckily we work with photographers
like Navajo that are able to kind of
capture this kind of moment again of
that knife edge of course you guys are
the secret of how it was produced by
hand but I cut a knife edge corner
against the you know abandoned warehouse
across the street that is you know also
happens to be you know owned by the
Menil collection around the corner but
but the kind of unevenness of that as a
project and so you know we wanted to
finish by saying you know we're offering
blanking I think today for us as a
practice is you know blanking is a way
of seeing for us blanking is a way as a
way of thinking about analysis in a way
maybe in the words of the nice Scott
Brown of thinking about withholding
judgment until maybe judgment can be can
make space by that withholding judgment
can become a space for deeper
connections and blanking as a way of
making our way of practice in a way that
we can take our practice and build on
accumulated experience while remaining
open for the new so thank you for coming
out and
I think we have time for a few questions
if you have the patience for them thank
you
[Applause]
[Music]
well I think part of it came from
there's a couple ideas of play
there's a very pragmatic idea that
actually the light in Houston is it's so
far south that it's um it's quite
intense and so for most of the kinds of
works that we need to show we actually
don't need that much of it and so there
was a way in which we knew from the
beginning it was gonna have to be kind
of highly regulated and so we were
trying to negotiate a space where we
could reveal to the street and to the
few people that do walk down the street
or drive Basques some glimpse inside
without it being too heavy-handed at the
same time there's a larger project is
the project of the set and the project
of the facade has taken something that
we see as a kind of monumental object
typically the white box gallery the
white box in the city and taking that
monumentality and unsettling it a little
bit like poking it like destabilizing it
and for us it produces a I think kind of
it becomes a kind of destabilized object
in the city and that way and and this is
to say also I could talk about this
longer but Houston and we're trying to
get this across you have to work in a
way that you're creating your own
context the context is quite unstable
and uneven and so the project is
responding to that kind of instability
and unevenness by trying to create
something that it's monumental enough to
hold its place in the city but unstable
enough to reflect maybe some kind of
doubt about it
status as well which i think is
important aspect to this yeah I would
add that I mean I think it's an
interesting question because when you
think about a window you think about a
window right but how do you address the
needs that I would know what the windows
are for reason it's like for view and
for air and for light and for me all
these things and how do you in a way do
the things that a window does without
using a window that would be one way I
guess also and like it's in a way like
sometimes I think that when you're
designing your project you're playing a
game with yourself right can we make a
project with no windows I mean of course
there's windows those are windows but
there's no like window windows you know
and then it becomes like a thing where
the way in which the panel with the way
which the panel is formed produces an
outcome that satisfies the needs that a
window gives you without ever making a
window per se right I should say one
really practical thing about this
project sorry I
but this client had been to our project
in Venice had seen the project in Venice
Biennale she knew of our worked in touch
and Taichung and in in cal Shana and she
knew that legacy of our exploration and
she basically demanded
bring some of those questions to the
table in this project which is such a
luxury that never happens ever and so
you know there's so much about what
makes the project that's the architect
and there's so much that's about the
architects relationship to the client
and the way the client supports or
doesn't support the profit process and
we were very lucky in this case yeah
[Music]
yeah that's a good question you know I'd
say there's two scales to talk about
that the larger scale would kind of
referred to in the talk which is to say
Houston more than I think almost any
place I've been in the country thinks
about itself in this cycle of crop
rotation and so there's a very generally
in the public there's a very fleeting
understanding of what their neighborhood
is that's not to say that people don't
have connection to the neighborhood but
that and the diversity of what makes the
neighborhood there if you drive down the
street there's you know there's
modernism next to Georgia next to
there's not a kind of evenness of how
that neighborhood is secondly this
particular neighborhood is than the
neighborhood of the manila foundation is
in there's two other galleries just down
the street
and so it's an it's a neighborhood it's
very close to the MDI that Johnston
Berkeley who's gonna show images up here
plug for Johnson Berkeley come to that
lecture is gonna show images I'm sure in
a few weeks so it's in that neighborhood
where people are there in the amazing
thing about the Menil is it's in a
residential neighborhood so what you're
seen as a residential neighborhood is
also residential neighborhood that's
already been for decades invaded by art
galleries so that's part of a question
of conversation that said nothing quite
like this is also built in neighborhood
and
and so we've we've had a lot of
different kinds of feedback from the
people in the neighborhood but mostly I
would say in our work we have incredibly
positive reception to trying something
new and I would say that the art gallery
was a much more another Nautica the
white oak music hall was a much more
aggressive aggressive is to strong word
but not really because there were
lawsuits in pub but a much more active
process of engaged engagement and and in
general in Houston there's the nice
thing about Houston is a sense that
you're in the city that still being made
and I think people have that expectation
it's not as what I like I worked in San
Francisco
we work in New York you know Rosen's
working in Boston now in those cities
they have a very strong sense of
formally what their city is since you
stated there's still a sense it's a
little bit of the Wild West that if you
can if you're up for it we're up for it
too and we'll try it and the music venue
was a good example about it we had tried
to do that project in New York it would
have worked on it for you know there's
the article about the Steven Holl
library in the New York Times yesterday
you know we would have worked on it for
15 years and it would have been five
times as much in Houston there was a
sense of like okay we don't have this we
need it the community supported it and
we were able to make it happen within
three years which is a sense of how the
gallery has played out as well and it's
been really well received by the
community that supports mostly because
the communities the supports are non
commercial it's really surfing and her
connections in the community bringing
folks in yeah
that totally answered a question but
yeah I don't have an answer I mean I
love like driving around Houston and
like there's so many odd things actually
when you start looking
it's a visually really interesting city
and I think yeah maybe this this is
definitely one this sticks out it's also
an AMA kind of Broad Street West Alabama
and so you kind of pass it very suddenly
there are things that are kind of hidden
in the neighborhoods that you come
across an ear constantly surprise so in
some ways it's not contextual but it's
the approach of producing something that
is unusual is something that you see I
think in Houston you know one technical
point I should make and it's a great
plan for exploitation is Houston is has
no zoning yeah so it's famous for having
no zoning so it's an experiment in a
city with no zoning which means you can
build pretty much anything anywhere so
we could have built a concrete factory
here if we wanted to it's a it's a
pretty wild it's the fourth largest city
in the country has that zoning yeah
yeah that's it that's a good example the
Detroit house project was in a way
conceived of as a rupture right because
as we were trying to think about you
know like in a in a neighborhood like
that it's not unlike a lot of
neighborhoods that are organized a
certain way where all the houses face
the street and then so when you get one
that's missing it's almost like where is
that house right so what are one of the
design problems what are the inner of
interventions that we can do on this
house that has an empty lot next to it
that makes it look like that empty lock
is meant to be there and one of the ways
of doing that is to insert this kind of
horizontal axis that then opens on to
the empty area next to it that then
produces this rotation you know and
actually we tried to do that a little
bit here but it's a much more
constrained site and it's not exactly
the same project but having this kind of
blank space you know and then leaving
this is like that the lot goes all the
way to the edge where the grass create
stops right and so leaving this
obviously if does not lead it back lead
it back to the back building but also
having a kind of big broad side and I
try to preserve that as as a kind of
entrance and face
maybe one more else
if you want for the hungry okay wait we
have wine
sorry guys he had asked a question
that's an impossible question to answer
but I do say that um yeah there's
moments when you enter certain projects
and maybe you have an experience this
yeah as a student but you will where you
realize usually they're not to singular
projects but you realize you've entered
into a culture of building than thinking
that we really don't have access to now
so I think about something like the copy
palace and Istanbul when you walk into a
space like that you realize there's a
entire material in building culture an
entire sociality an entire technology
that we don't necessarily have access to
now but has been deployed there at a
level that is quite remarkable that
really kind of makes your hair stand on
end and you probably can find a few
moments like that
you know fatehpur sikri or would be
another good example
we look a lot at the jaunt our montar in
Jaipur or you know or you know the tio
tio con outside of Mexico City where you
say you know we can do a lot with CNC
holes and MDF but that there's material
cultures that that we don't have access
to anymore and when I experienced that I
think those are some of my favorite
experiences with architecture yeah I
think that's a giant enlarger and then
also I mean I think one projects that
are actually artifacts of civilization
rather than buildings maybe like I think
that a more contemporary example I think
would be there's this complex in New
York City on the west side called the
West that artists community or what's
called West Beth but basically the
Martha Graham's in the top and then
there's like a big piece of
infrastructure that goes through there's
basically like a piece of the High Line
that goes through there and there's a
colonnade on the side and basically it
it fills the entire block but if these
like any crustaceans of like development
that have happened over time that
produced this kind of that's almost like
a this object that is like a series of
many small decisions that then becomes
this overwhelming artifact of the city
which even has this kind of the kind of
infrastructure scraping through it but
it also what I love about it also is
that it's
an artist community that they just
recently opened the lottery for a short
period so it has this kind of utopian or
idealistic idea by a community as well
that's in it and so I don't think it's
formed I think it's like the way in
which form and like society or
aspirations for how you want to live
come together and then also how these
things persist through time to become
examples that I don't think you can
necessarily plan for but you can try to
plan to be a part of right
[Applause]
