tonight we have a bit of a special event
and I I know I say that every time but
obviously we have a table here to prove
it so tonight we're gonna have a
conversation between Todd Gannon and Joe
day the two of them will be discussing
Todd's new book Reyner Banham and the
paradoxes of high tech which was
released late last year by the getty
research institute and i just want to
mention i think you saw that there's a
some representative from the Wexner
Center who are outside and they'll be
selling the book for 20% off for $45 and
Todd has also confirmed that he's going
to sign some of those if you achieve it
so now I trust that that most of you in
the room here know Todd who's returned
as architects as our architectural
section head at the beginning of this
academic year and I say the Turner
course because Todd earned two degrees
from the Ohio State before going to Los
Angeles where he earned his PhD at UCLA
and stuck around
most recently teaching history theory
and design courses at CyArk
but one of the reasons why I think this
conversation should be particularly
interesting tonight is that part of
someone who's able to wear a few hats
and well over the last six or so months
most of us have become familiar with
Todd as a teacher you might be a little
bit less familiar with Todd and his work
as a scholar which is really the
foreground of tonight's discussion so
Todd will introduce the book that he and
Joe will be discussing I think but I
just wanted to briefly mention let's say
one more hat which is I think a kind of
third hat that's lurking somewhere
between the teacher and the scholar and
that would be the designer one of the
kind of distinctive aspects of Todd
scholarship that I think you'll notice
in this book and the discussion tonight
is that he pays particular attention to
those aspects of architecture which are
traditionally maybe less frequented by
scholars and more familiar to designers
and by this I mean specifically the kind
of strange space between
ideas and objects where the majority of
a designer's time is often spent but
this is let's say his third hat as a
kind of designer also it starts to imply
that maybe hats are kind of the wrong
idiom altogether because Todd's ability
to think critically about the ways in
which thoughts and things impose
themselves on one another
evidenced for example by our source
books here at the Milton school or maybe
by Todd's more recent interests and
figures like Gandhi Morton seem to
suggest that a clean parceling of ideas
from things or the agencies of designers
and scholars is not only made more
difficult but maybe not entirely
desirable so I'll borrow from one of
Todd's recent texts and say that if
instead of stable hierarchies or hats
between modes of expertise such as
theory and design or ideas and objects
Todd scholarship suggests something like
a loop in which conventionally separate
things are made to fold back on to one
another so the architecture might
encounter itself in unexpected ways now
one of these unexpected cap encounters
is that if we were to follow this loop
for long enough I suspect that we'd
eventually run into the similarly
hapless Joe day who is our second
speaker for the evening Joe is joining
us from Los Angeles where he teaches
where he leaves the practice Deegan day
design as well as from SIA grade teaches
both design and theory and serves on Sai
Arts Board of Trustees and I was really
excited when when Todd invited Joe
because among many other accomplishments
Joe is also the author of fantastic 2013
book Corrections and collections
architecture art and crime which
examines the parallel bloom of two types
of institutional architectures in the
second half of the 20th century and I
think it's not too much of a stretch to
suggest that this book also performs a
kind of trick in which two distinct and
seemingly unrelated things museums and
prisons are brought to bear upon one
another
to their mutual invitation with concepts
like minimalism see reality and regimen
regimentation in other words Joe's book
gives us something like the loop and in
fact the creative work of deacon day
often relies on Joe's insistence on
seeing relationships between ideas as
sites for organizational innovation or
in other words seeing disciplinary
research is a problem of design Deacon
day develops intricate diagrams which
they call arrays which are both critical
overviews of art architecture in their
histories as well as design instruments
for locating their creative ambitions
within the field at large and I'd
encourage you to look at a show that
they held it's IARC I think two years
ago also called arrays in which there's
it's an incredible show in which there's
over 30 of these diagrams which they've
been producing over the last twenty
years so this is all to say that in two
very different ways what we encounter in
Todd and Joe's respective work seems to
be a predilection for replacing hats
with discursive loops in which the
disciplines own specific techniques and
conventions fold back on themselves an
architecture touch of architecture by
surprise so with that let's welcome Todd
Gannon into a day who have come together
to talk about a theorist Reyner Banham
he is famous for his love of Awesome
tatius lee large hats
so we hit a whole issue with these
microphones last time we okay so we're
not going to be able to top that that
was fantastic Thank You Curtis I think
we just ended now but thank you for
being such a an astute reader both of us
I think it's this is a weird talk I
guess it's a it's funny I don't do this
sort of thing very often like try to
promote the books and some of you may
have been around here long enough
or remember I gave a talk on this book
while it was in development here at the
school maybe five years ago and I
thought that it was I didn't want to
just do the book talk again even though
many of you maybe haven't seen it but I
guess but I thought it would be more fun
frankly to have a friend who knows the
Animas work probably as well as I do or
better and who knows me in a way that I
always find a little bit surprising and
disarming frankly and and so we're not
totally sure where the conversation is
going to go but we thought we'd talk a
little bit about the process of writing
about the process of research and also
you know the content of the book I mean
to the book in a very kind of short
nutshell really centers around another
book that doesn't exist so at the very
end in his life Reyner Banham was
working on a monograph on high-tech the
name of that book was making
architecture the paradoxes of high-tech
and unfortunately banham was diagnosed
with cancer in the summer of 1987 which
was he was about a year in the
preparatory
by March of 1988 instead and so the book
was never completed he left in the
archive a draft introduction which we
were able to include in this book here
and if you look at the way then used to
write his books often he would work
through a lot of the ideas that
structured the arguments in magazine or
in journalism and it appears based on
the table of contents which he left
behind which I realized that would have
been an interesting document to have we
don't have it I'm sorry but if you look
at bedroom standing context begin to
kind of piece together at least the
rough sketch of what he was trying to do
with that book so a lot of what I did
was trying to figure out i began by
trying to figure out what Bannon was
would have said had he lived long enough
to say it and what happened in that
process is that it became it became
clear that the story was bigger than my
packing away
what Bannon was really writing about was
modernism and whether modernism or how
to make sure modernism had a future what
that
might be could that future be influenced
by scholarship and so those are you know
the kind of themes that live in the back
in the kind of conceptualization of the
book I guess just to kind of orient you
a little bit the book in many ways
bantams life as a scholar you know he
began in the 1950s working on but you
know high modernism of the nineteen
teens 20s and 30s at the same time he
was part of the group of English
architects or British Architects
involved in the hatching of the new
Brutalism and what becomes clear as many
of the ideas that kind of fired high
tech architecture that work of people
like Norman Foster Richard Rodgers Renzo
Piano Grimshaw etc really was wrestling
that work was really wrestling with a
lot of the same kinds of ideological
questions that the Brutalism wrestling
with so the book begins as banne and his
career did in melees brutalist and it
sketch it uses the development of high
tech as a way to look at
and aspects of banners life so it's the
book in a way is trying to wear two hats
in one hand in one hand it's a kind of
quiet
it's a scholarly study of fan events in
the story and on the other hand it's a
it glances often at the history of high
tech so maybe that makes it a little
complicated maybe it makes it more
interesting I'll let you decide but I
just wanted to give that little bit of
backstory these say first thank you very
much for having me it's really a
pleasure to be a OSU this is to be
honest a bit of a mythical institution
for me teaching Todd for quite a few
years and Jeff kept this and function of
colleagues that all of a sudden all seem
to be running schools like
at UCLA at UCLA I feel like I've come
just to see the you know just to see how
things take shape here wonderful day I'm
not enough sleep so I apologize a little
bit a little bit off-kilter I was
thinking as Todd was speaking the
paradigm for my talk tonight should
probably be Penn & Teller but actually
like started talking so I get to be the
other guy I really actually what I
wanted to bring with me from Los Angeles
was kind of a little bit of what has
been actually a really sustaining
friendship with Todd over the last five
or ten years and it was a fantastic and
thank you for the kind introduction I
think you touched on something that's
really central to our lives in
architecture and not necessarily not
necessarily a common paradigm in our
field but we really like wearing a few
hats in fact I usually wear a hat in
wish I had today and trading between
design and criticism and teaching and to
a certain degree diagramming which in my
case brokers between those is a way of
operating in our field that I think
actually was once considerably more
common than it is now but that I think
might be valuable to generations in
school right now in a way that it wasn't
necessarily as crucial for the last 20
years I think the last 20 years there
were and the projects of the digital
turn and globalization big collective
endeavors that people could enter into
in a lot of different ways and sort of
take take on take on bits and pieces of
maybe in a way it has to see em
generations to post-war modernism but I
think we're entering a different time
and I think being able to talk about how
architecture can answer the times and
being able to think about it a few
different with two different balances is
valuable and Todd and I got to know each
other teaching attire can talking about
work and actually largely through a
discussion of rain Urbana who when we
first met Todd was completing a
dissertation on and so in a sense I both
I've read this book argue about arguably
I've read it twice but they were two
very different books and they differed
in important ways
Todd's dissertation was called theory
and design in the last Machine Age or
refined Adams early theory in design in
the first and it was a remarkable study
of Bannon and his world and there were
there were chapters we were talking
about about Brutalism and how he was an
executive formally in this the new
volume but quite a bit of the
independence
early intellectual development okay and
how he brought a particular point of
view on the world to to the United
States and especially to Los Angeles my
fascination with Reyner Banham actually
picks up on that geographical note I
found Reno
in school on the East Coast and
desperately homesick for Los Angeles and
a professor of mine recommended that I
pick up in Los Angeles architecture of
the four Ecology's and I ended up citing
my senior thesis in his picture of the
ten 405 cloverleaf and what he's leaving
out is that he also found them writing
the introduction to the latest edition
of the for apologies was interesting
it's more than just it's more than a
mature well I would actually say this
that my interet my interest in Bannon is
precisely amateur and I'm comfortable
with that
but I'm shaking so much - too much
coffee
and this is yeah so this is where where
my piece of the puzzle picks up I moved
back to Los Angeles in the early 90s
actually about four years after Reyner
Banham had had like the city and passed
away in the early eighties and it was
still very much his City Charles Jencks
miscibility King periodically his
dissertation student and more generally
I think criticism in Los Angeles the
whole way of discussing the city of
quite a bit to to Reyner Banham
in the early 2000s I got a call from UC
Press Berkeley and a friend of a friend
had recommended that they talk with me
about an introduction for the new the
new volume there are a few important
things to know about Los Angeles
architectures with for apologies and
we'll talk a little bit about the four
Ecology's but a very important thing to
know about it is that there's already a
fantastic introduction to LA a 40 by
Anthony fiddler which is also included
in this and this could get them all I
think up this one
but Anthony Midler's Anthony Midler's
look at at Los Angeles families Los
Angeles was through the through the lens
of a kind of noir detective he took the
book as this sort of almost as a crime
scene that needed explanation so Midler
tracked down for example how how
how Mary Bannon had assembled the map of
the many maps that illustrate illustrate
the book he went through ballons
actually I think he studied how Reyner
Banham learned to drive and therefore
the navigate la and how he got his sense
for the city that led to his development
of the theory of for ecologies fiddlers
introduction is a fantastic explanation
of how a book like this comes together
and one of the things he points out is
that the book is dedicated to Cedric
price performative members of our Quran
who had asked Fannin to explain los
angeles to him in the late night in the
late 1960s what they wanted for Los
Angeles in 2000 and 2009 was an
introduction in that that discussed a
bit of what had happened since la for LA
architecture the four Ecology's and that
frankly was addressed to an audience
much like all of you that might be
younger architects who might be thinking
about studying architecture in Los
Angeles or something else that might be
interest in the city an introduction for
students in many respects and I was
thrilled to thrilled thrilled to have
the opportunity in fact thrilled and
terrified so when I'm showing to the
what I'm showing to the right was the
diagram I did the day after I got this
phone call and I was trying to think you
know look at the four ecologies and see
if they make sense anymore but like if I
were gonna try to chart LA how would I
do it and in you know in the 2000s I
would say
makes more sense than to read to read my
city in terms of a kind of quadratic
equation that would look a little bit
like this
the polarize sunshine and noir which are
famously tied up in finish that
vanishing object are either extreme of
the kind of temperamental spectrum as
well as a notion of la as both a
fantastic projection of what the world
might might look like at some point it
was certainly from odd of the 20th
century American auto government cities
could look like versus versus a notion
of realism that have become very
important in the scholarship around in
Los Angeles the 80s and 90s with mike
davis men soldiers post modern geography
sort of unpacking the actual dynamics of
the city's formation I really actually
historicizing the city so just to give
you a sense for how I
I often work I try to kind of I try to
find polarities that have you know that
seemed to work set them opposite one
another and then look at what the
quadrants yield what could what could
survive between us and in this case
between sunshine and fantasy Disneyland
certainly made sense between fantasy
Millar Blade Runner on teaching of
course now it's I are called
Blade Runner
1982 2020 I think that it's to make
between new AR and realism I think
Chinatown was an important watershed the
movie about the Mulholland what water
graph that made loss actor as possible
and actually my fourth quarter was the
toughest in some way that's between
sunshine and more I really think the
whole series of case study houses that
set up a different discussion of modern
architecture in the post-war years as
Richard Moitra and Schindler who were
sort of Frank Lloyd Wright's major major
while they were apprenticed to and
briefly as their as their rivalry was
starting to open up to new possibilities
gives you something else
from this I want to show you this time
because I want to get back to your table
of contents and try and do this but this
is this is a brief in the break down how
Los Angeles architecture of ecologies
operates rhetorically and it's important
that it's both a very clear and
incredibly obscure structure for look
when you look at the table of contents
what jump setting first in the right
column are where he identifies his four
ecologies which would be and they move
roughly from west from west to east from
the from the ocean's edge refer via
through the foothills plains of it which
spread between those two and themselves
support Autopia or the the freeway and
it's more than just a freeway system but
the the automotive members
so on the first glance this seems like a
book that makes perfect you know that
sets up its challenges it takes them on
in a series but now as you delve into
them and I think this is important for
talking with both about it about the
material that you were wrestling with
tied
manaman actually oscillates between all
of these questions incessantly he won't
let go of any one as we clarify another
he talks about something specific to one
that then ends up a lens on the other
three I think as you go through la Los
Angeles which frankly is probably the
easiest of balinese books you see it you
see it as a an interesting very
complicated way of creating what would a
fiddler termed a freeway history or a
recursive kind of architectural writing
in which one cycles through and around
an idea a number of times to try to
clarify it in this idea of recursion
became really it became really sort of
central to me in this in my discussion
of balance work but I think Reyner
Banham is important I think we were
still sitting here talking about rain
about in part because Reyner Banham
and his counterfeit his counterpart
Colin Rowe advocated two very different
modes of thinking about architecture and
writing about it and if Colin Rowe was a
fundamentally recombinant thinker who
looked at architecture through a lens of
cubism and collage and how you bring
disparate fragments together to make
sense of a new whole I think danam spent
his career trying to find a counterpoint
to that method and that and his
counterpoint was it was a looping as you
put it so nicely or recursion a system
of recursion that would pull through an
idea a number of times to clarify it as
this was the quad for tots this is
college squad and this was when Todd
gave the tie gave me theory and design
in the last machine age I was both
flattered and intimidated to be handed a
dissertation I am more they a groupie to
my PhD friends than their peers
I mean AG minutes and then we were
talking about this today and I hope this
future for some of you our field has has
become much more there far far more
serious scholars in our field than there
were even as we were entering into it
twenty or twenty-five or thirty years
ago what was once and certainly in ban
on this cave in balance timing Charles
Moore gets a PhD basically in art
history to open up the possibility of a
PhD in architecture in the United States
and what has become a kind of floodgate
of really serious scholarship field but
I and I it's not false modesty that has
me wanting to play amateur in this in
this conversation because I think
actually it's through and it's through a
kind of enlightened amateurism that the
practitioners in our field will actually
capitalize on the most some of the most
valuable scholarship that's been
produced and last leaders so when Todd
handed me a headed mean it's
dissertation I went through and I tried
to kind of develop a system of
polarities that might start to make
sense of it I should adhere
parenthetically but my son is named
rainer abode a so my homage to Reyner
Banham had at that point taking a much
more concrete and straightforward form
and Todd's book see
but we talked about it and actually
easier and less time consuming to make a
person actually it was nice as an aside
I happened now that I know two boys
named Rainer in Los Angeles for and Mary
Bannon collects pictures of his namesake
so if any of you choose to go that route
this is that diagram cleaned up and
after some review with with with time I
want to go through it a little bit with
you because I think relates back I
talked to your table of contents in the
way you've sort of the way you've
started to unpack the question of the
high-tech relative the question of the
high-tech and whether for ban on the
high-tech was going to become an
inclusive term or one in a spectrum of
terms that started to make sense of
Technology and engineering as he
understood it in advanced advanced
engineering
in architecture so what what's
remarkable I think what's one of the
really remarkable things about Todd
scholarship around them is how he takes
the relatively generic and often sort of
lazy use of the term technology in
architecture and starts to really
develop a rigor for looking at it one of
the things he notices early in balam's
writing is that distinction value draws
between two persona to two persona of
the engineer so there are engineers that
there are engineers of design needed
products that are involved in industrial
design and design things we need there
are also and this was a term relatively
new to me and it turns out a relatively
doing the inventor the the buff of the
boffin we've been discussing how French
or English the pronunciation of that
term should be a boffin is a boffin is
indeed a specialized expert and a
specialized expert often and somebody
may actually be involved in the skunk
works for developing the solution to the
key problem in which case the acronym
back-office intelligence is one of the
supposed entomology I can unpack
for a second please so somewhere mid
1970s vanam finds himself in an argument
with his protege Charles Jencks and the
argument has to do in the big scale of
things with modern as a rich man as
promoted you know the continuation of a
certain legacy of 9/11 thirties kinds of
production and post modernist on which
Jenks was working very hard to advance
in the field and from that there's
several steps that give unpacking the
book but from that thinking they arrived
at claude lévi-strauss a--'s distinction
between the engineer and the three
collier and so in the savage mind
letting Strauss talks about these two
modes of cooking of the world Western
culture typically
the engineer the engineer someone who
makes everything custom you know the
engineer events solutions to every
problem and everything's kind of
custom-made and precise and deliberate
whereas a recall your works with
whatever fragments are robbing the
debris Collier just kind of you know
MacGyver would be the sort of American
version of the recall you or you know
that it doesn't matter what the problem
is a paperclip a jar of peanut butter
and some tape will get you out of
whatever flying and this fight because
they have this fighting chance is on the
side of the recall newer says the new
Jim Jackson developed a theory event hoc
ISM which is another kind of collages
practice proto post modernist and he
sets up band known as the straw dog and
he said you know ban them in his
engineers and all of his technique stuff
there that they do it wrong and the
Brico you're doing it right and they had
this fighting in need let letters pages
of the architectural review and Bainer
comes lives and heat
he doesn't defend the engineer so much
as explode the entire argument like if
you look at any practice regardless of
how collages or scientifically maybe
everything is working out of
recombinations of existing pieces like
everybody works from the catalog in some
way and so that everybody
recall your and it's a kind of
meaningless or unproductive comparison
at the same time even he been kind of
turns about of you gets very excited
about this British history the boffin
and the boffin is the kind of tinkerer
in the garage you know the guy that
fixes his toaster rather than buys
anyone a character that kind of works on
his own kind of freaking things up as he
goes and the boffin as a character band
invisibly bringing in a conversation at
that time but I brought it into the
protects as a way to kind of distinguish
two modes of high tech high tech on one
hand was the sort of super full custom
engineering kind of version but if you
really look at somebody like Richard
Rogers or Peter Cook for instance you
have this kind of tinkering mentality
where you'll take a little piece of this
and a little piece of that put it
together invent a solution to the
problem and the boffin seemed to be a
way out of this
binary showdown between the engineer and
the Brico you are the bottom sides of
the equation in suspension that the
Bachmann was happy to you know custom
design things but at the same time happy
had just kind of make it up as we went
along and and it seemed to be
representative of a theme that happened
but which the idea of paradox the band
have often seemed to work through these
binaries that you're describing
but the binary he worked very hard
particularly in his argument of high
tech to hold those binaries in
suspension right the high tech was both
traditional and technologically
motivated that high tech was both
forward-looking in backward and these
kind of paradoxical constructs that
vanaman would repeatedly return to are
really a big part of this and the boffin
was the kind of personage occation of
that you might say wonder so would would
you in the energies fallen human James
Bond is they've got a prototypical
Bachman so the word itself comes out of
a post-war British military culture it
generally refers to the Q type of guy so
they get it
it's thought that it's an acronym for
intelligence but it's you know these
kind of military men working on secret
technologically advanced military
projects but the absent-minded professor
in a militarized technological context
do you think with the blundering time
that it does you were talking about it I
think and I think this is often the case
that these dyads
these diodes need to become tryouts and
the Rico lore of boffin and the engineer
that it's more a question of
triangulation that I wonder also if it's
triangulation with a with ik with the
kind of temporality to it or with a
wonder if it's temperament or
temporality that matters and maybe it is
a question of attitude
Rico lore is usually I mean the RICO law
is associated more directly with with
fine art right with assemblage and with
with with the whole collection of
collage based practices in the 20th
century it's associated with a kind of
sincere effort to to build to build or
externalize one world of one's world by
by taking by reassembling fragments to
show how that world takes shape right
the prequel or in my Los Angeles frame
of reference would be Simon Rodia and
Watts Towers watchtowers are
it's a prime example of that motor work
and both so if you queue and you Ronia
you've to the u2 makers who are very
much at odds with what would generally
be perceived to be a more mainstream and
institutionally sanctioned practice in
engineering which requires intense
training yeah well I never realized
Curtis is a kind of version of this I
mean a good guy that can build a little
swag and now them pieces of the logic of
being able to predict that I can acquire
enough pieces to build it up into a car
I knew there's a version of that I think
in Curtis I'm gonna move you back into
the conversation and then I mean and I
barely know you but I think I mean in
that case in that case you're a nice
it's a nice unification of the two terms
because actually the Brico lore is
taking a boffins challenge you want the
thing to you presumably want the
Volkswagen to take you somewhere and not
becoming a teen old sculpture or maybe
not I think the whole reason to bring
this in commerce
and it does get unpacked I think a
little bit more coherently in the book
maybe but one of the problems that
phantom is really invested in analyzing
what is the place of the architect in
the world
what is the architects job who does the
architect speak to and one of the things
abandoned would realize and you see this
all through his is text from the 1950s
to 1980s that he's constantly struggling
with the number of audiences the number
of constituencies that any architect
needs to address so architects talk to
each other they wear one kind of hat and
speak one dialect when they talk to
clients they speak a very different
dialogue when they're speaking to you
know when they're solving problems of
pressing societal or humanitarian
concern like we need a space that's
going to keep the rain out and the heat
in and accommodate human life banham
finds generally that architects do a bad
job when architects talk about the
problems that are internal problems of
style problems of disciplinary tastes
that they do a little bit better and so
bad him in many ways was trying to train
architects to like speak to their
constituent constituencies better and
also speak to each other better and it's
breakdown in these kind of hierarchies
between these two modes of address and
so the figure of the boffin again for me
see the
kind of maker that wasn't so
conventionally determined by tradition
that the boffin is familiar with both
sides the argument but was also able to
kind of operate in ways that neither
side was able to do as well and so I
think we're making more out of the
coffin than what's made out of this but
we spent more words here than I spend in
here I think because I had this hunch
some happy matter it seems it solved a
lot of problems for me intellectually
let me let me tip into these are these
are two pairings that occur and in the
book and in particular
Todd discusses them in sort of an
ingenious way mid mid tax but they are
they're everything also they're
introduced actually in Reyner Banham
austex which is included in this volume
as well worth the 24th the panel's
dibalans sa high tech and advanced
engineering haven't been published
talking to us a little more background
there but what I wanted to kind of draw
our attention to quickly because I'm
hoping it will it will clarify any
medicine bomb went off in the schedule
he sets up he sets up a comparison high
tack and
Engineering by looking at two at two
pairs of examples the first drawn from
industrial design in the second in the
second architecture these are the two so
both we have the we have a Salomon ski
boot and the molten cycle Reyner Banham
famously is writing and I don't a scene
and it becomes increasingly the argues
that these two these two objects are
fundamentally while both evidence of
humankind's advance advances in being
able to make better and better and more
efficient more efficiently engineered
objects they arise out of two very very
different sentiments and as you
different sets of ambitions I'll come
back to the via very briefly this slide
really encapsulates for bantams why he
uses it example this is the problem that
any writer or the history of high tech
has to solve that all four of these
objects are considered high tech and the
immediately sees that like
they don't go together very easily and
so the way he describes the theorem is
that the boot and the portion building
are a kind of international style have
an international style into the way and
that they are primarily style that the
boot is fairly conventional the building
is fairly conventional but there's
styled in the language of material
his argument for fosters4 no building on
the right and the molding cycle is that
these two are driven by performance
the wheels are half the size of a
regular bicycle wheel because you want
to be able to fold it in just happiness
or later so he may similarly the
fenceline of structural system of you
know is team managed documentation
determined by the forces of gravity and
strength of materials
and so for ban on the high-tech hats the
hold and suspension these two qualities
on one hand style and on the other hand
performance and if you go too high or
too far to either side missing something
about high-tech so the real struggle
again is kind of holding this binary in
suspension how does one invent a
description of a body of work that is
sufficiently supple as to accommodate
all these very disparate things but at
the same time sufficiently coherent and
clear that it means something and so
that was really the struggle that is the
struggle of the historian so my theory
my theory is that that that style for
venom is off limit for version of
performance yes that in fact the
specific ways that those two objects
were roasted the roast of the poram had
to do with their eccentricities may be
that they are in fact both boffin
products that that he talks he talks
clearly
in those terms as Todd said the the the
perversion of performance in in that
bicycle is simply the idea of reducing
the diameter of a tire by half and
therefore being able to quarter the
storage space that it requires when
you're not writing it it isn't a
question of how well it rides
how well the rides has been hotly
debated ever since what what jumped out
at me and honestly this is the one
discovery of the last week I've read I
think a novel discovery wrote here for
the first was that I was looking at that
Salomon food and he discusses it Valon
discusses that in in 1987 or 88 as a as
a generic ski booth as the kind of ski
boot you would rent at any ski resort
you happen to go to and in 1987 he
happened to be correct for three years
rear entry ski boots were in fact the
norm but they were incredible aberration
in terms of the in terms of the
development of high-performance ski
boots if you are a half serious skier
you may have a very faint memory of
those from the 70s and 80s but they went
away the reason they were the reason
they were vetted and they were actually
invented by the Hansen
a patent that was purchased later by by
Solomon when the Hansons boffins all
couldn't keep their business right
was that a rear entry ski boot was
simply more comfortable to put on it
wasn't necessarily a better boot to ski
and it probably was worse but ski boots
are pain he has to get on and off your
feet and these aren't by hinging them
that way they're easy to take on and off
and they they for a few years the 1980s
that ease of use trumped their actual
performance in the RFC
my theory on Raider banham is that he
was drawn almost ceaselessly to examples
of a kind a kind of a kind of perfect
examples of perversity in the
performance and that it's in that
perversity that one starts to see their
singularity and often they're kind of
architectonic viability yeah so that the
rinoa building here actually this is to
show that the market has proven that I'm
very right in terms of having to have
these two objects acquired historically
you can spend $60,000 on a serious
Milton bike still very much in
production
and event excel in the mood actually 40
wasn't the lowest bid and I could find
on those papers and all of Sullivan's
current line is more more conventionally
like a climbing booth the last 400 years
something you would enter like an
ordinary food but I think from from
bamas point of view that singularity
that singularity over is the redefining
of purpose and the so performance away
from the normative report parameters of
performance is really important I think
maybe even more important than the
argument about a generic engineer that
he makes that makes actually I think an
error on the Solomons people and very
convincingly in terms of this Porsche
Porsche right well I mean here this is
ban them this is where ban on the taste
maker is in a bit of a quarrel which ban
of the historian so it is comparison of
these two so here this is the contact
problem again high-tech asking me both
of these things he clearly prefers
austere to do words fast but I
understand
hi-tec must must have a place for
Dewhurst and really kind of struggles
with this he he realizes that there's
much more to renault than like this is
clearly not the most efficient way to
design a building in terms of cost in
terms of ease of building and to you
know they're both equally style and
Vanna prefers the style that he made he
seems to prefer the style of the note to
the style of Porsche which he sees as
maybe a little bit retrograde you see
his style preference is much more
intense than the scholarly work and a
big part of what I think both productive
and enjoyable in Bantam scholarship my
tech needs to struggle to figure out
what is the proper aesthetic descriptive
vocabulary for something like fosters so
the end of the day Foster is still
within the architectural camp it's still
part of what we do you know fandom is an
often you know high five
it's practitioners for being so
comfortable with dismissing architecture
the architecture is too slow it's too
old and can't quite do what it's
supposed to do we all remember the
famous closing denier in designer Chris
machine where he says that what
architecture realize in the 1930s was
that if one wanted to run with
technology you realize very quickly
you're running with a vast crowd and in
order to keep up you may have to shed
like the futurist did the very
professional garments that identify you
as an architect right so from the
beginning of bannon's right I think I
got that quote close how do you get from
the beginning that's in there somewhere
but from the beginning man is is sort of
torn he's committed to architectures of
discipline he's equally committed to
performance as a cultural an area and he
sees the dissonance between those two
things and so at the beginning of his
life he invents he invents a concept
that he calls when are setenta and other
architecture is something borrows from
art the art of people like
a followed see Henderson's friends in
the international air cycle the
international the independent those but
you know at first he said it's you know
architecture you got to get out from
under all of these conventions we have
to get out from under
classic asymmetry conventional coherence
oh it's almost an adolescent reaction
against the apparently oppressive
disciplinary conventions of conventional
design as better so you realize that's a
bad idea then we throw the baby out with
the bathwater if we do that and so it's
work on high tactics trying to find a
much more subtle version of that art of
that argument where it's not
architecture as it flows that kind of an
actor and echinus that game versus every
versus design rejection solves the
problems that we have in the world but
rather can we find a way through
architecture that accommodates both
paths and what he comes up with at the
end of the of his life is he what he
calls and other modernism and so the
distinction between the narced into
autre and and other tradition in modern
architecture is the way he said in a
bunch of different ways
I assumed he would have in the book but
this other tradition is basically been a
bifurcating the history of modern art
there's one trajectory that basically
comes out of Nikolaus Pevsner travels
forward through the International style
and winds up at buildings like the
Porsche there's another tradition in
modern architecture that really begins
with beginning moves forward through the
constructivists through foster and
produces high tech in high style high
tech you might say so he tries to face
it that the high tech has to accommodate
both of these traditions and it's a very
fine line he has to walk press as a
story to be able to do this and
sometimes the kind of oscillates and
says me I think that is not architecture
after all maybe it's some other thing
maybe we need to develop a vocabulary if
if we're to be true to this sort of
stuff maybe we need to get out from
under our control together but he was
clearly uncomfortable position and every
time he walks to that edge argumentative
he always backs up he's like we can
throw our architecture no
really I wonder so in his famous essay
on argument in 1965 in design quarterly
you know we don't want form to follow
function into oblivion so you compare
such a price and RT Graham it's a
separate price is really fantastic but
the unfortunate thing about this the fun
Palace is that it will disappear like
there's no there there there's no visual
component architecture requires that
visual component and so in a sense our
Graham wins the showdown between set
with such a price because Arthur Graham
understands how the maintain an image
and image ability and so the inequality
moves through buildings
baddam is really conservative so at the
end of his career it becomes clear the
panel is much more conventional than he
is often made out to be but he was much
more willing to condemn on a certain
anachronism that he was much more
committed to tradition than simply
technology so part of what I was trying
to do in the book or tried to do with
wrote the book was to find a way to hold
that that tension together in the way
that Anna did her to demonstrate how
hard it was for Bannon to try to give
each side its do without compromising
either architecture or performance but
it seemed I mean it seems like there
there's a radicality in in there's a
radicality in his inclusion I think and
of course of his life he earlier in his
life he took sides more emphatically and
often he took the more he ah he I think
he tried almost uniformly to take the
more technologically out of the guard
side he'll later in his life he starts
to see later in the later in his life
that second came out that really
beautifully he starts to see the
disciplinary consequences of jettisoning
you know wonder actually if I can set up
finally something like a question to the
author so we talked a little bit and I
think it's watching at this point a bit
the last two chapters are architecture
beyond building and building beyond
architecture can you talk a little bit
just about how you have the to have how
the to compare how they feed off well
this was
it really has to do with this
distinction between their style and
performance in a way you know if we
accept that architecture and building
are not the same thing which I think I
think it's quite easy to demonstrate
that just as you cannot reduce
literature to voice you cannot reduce
architecture to buildings right
architecture is more than buildings just
as diverse and one of the struggle was
the Panama that works quite beautifully
in his latest is and and in a book his
only monograph on the Arctic remember
Ron Garan he looks at this is the
abandoned that Heron was one of these
bad boys who seemed to be too impatient
of architecture in the 60s and was
marching out into uncharted territory
that may have been extra architectural
territory he immediately says that that
that is the wrong way to see hair
the artifact Herron is quintessential
architect and Hudson draws because he is
committed to the architectural
activities in you so in this very late
essays Bannon keeps coming back to the
idea that architecture is a fairly
limited mode of design has its roots in
Renaissance Italy and everything that
doesn't have a transcendence in
Renaissance Italy kinda is an
architecture that you know all of the
stuff that mad that is shoehorning into
various history curricula I would say
there's a very solid argument and if we
try to the way that we try to cram every
kind of construction crust of the planet
into the portfolio of architecture
architecture becomes unmanageable and
all of those other modes of design
become copyrights like this is the wrong
way to do so at the end of his life he
tries to draw incredibly narrow
definition of architecture and he winds
up drawing so narrow that buildings are
harder that architecture is really
determined by method as opposed to
object and so architecture beyond
building really absolutely if we go with
a band I think he's right on this and I
realized that I had I needed kind of
writing along these lines in different
ways while I was working on the text but
to really understand that architecture
and building are two different things
and the commitments the discipline is
not necessarily a commitment to building
and I believe this to be true I believe
this to be defensemen philosophically
and I believe this to be banners
position and I believe both vana and I
are very uncomfortable with leaving
building out of the equation and so the
Bannos when he calls his other tradition
and modern architecture which doesn't
fit his definition of hi-tech very well
which dozen doesn't seem to follow his
own rules becomes a way to kind of
valorize
and so the possibility that the sketches
out is that there is a mode of building
that's perfectly viable in the building
I think that illustrates this fast as
another by Kevin Foster it's the realest
favorite new onyx building the dip
switch which if you look at the way it's
made and you look at the way there was a
prettier photograph she was right but
but the idea that it might be possible
to think a kind of building that isn't
encumbered by architecture and what
happens in bannon's writing and again is
what is the architecture does disappear
that in use you'll see it in his
treatment of Philip Johnson's Glass
House you'll see it in his treatment of
fosters if switch building that both of
those buildings see not to have any
architecture in the conventional sense
that he lays out the end of his career
and what they haven't instead is
interior design and landscape so if you
go to so architecture kind of melts it
fades into invisibility leaving behind
only
neighbor disciplines which are normally
seen in secondary are often erroneously
I would say seen secondary and so anyway
banner is weirdly valid you know kind of
elevating the status of interior design
and landscape design in his attempt to
kind of make sense of this incredible
diversity of building arts and so the
distinction in those two chapters is
really done but if you know architecture
is really if we have to say what is in
one word we would say it's a method as
opposed to an object and building is
still an object it's an object we need
and there may be a way to think it
outside of the conventions of the
discipline and so he died before he
really ends that story the last essay he
wrote of the black box secret history of
architecture really trying to address
this question he defines an incredibly
narrow definition this is architecture
is for masonry it's held together by
that gravity and it's volumes are
effectively closed anything that doesn't
adhere to that tripartite formula
and this is an astonishing thing for
Reyner Banham
the principle apologists for lunar
landers and Space Lab and Arctic grams
weird medium plastic bags filled with
stereo equipment is viable things to
live in that verb a nun who spent so
much of his life seeming devoted to
expanding the fields in fact arrives at
the end of his life at the narrowest
definition of architecture and it's
those paradoxes that I read I really
would drive the book and I really think
are what drive a non-speaking
and I don't think they're really
reflected in ecology I think I think for
the most part this scholarship that
exists on Bantam so far really
concentrates on the beginning of his
life where he's much more impatient with
the traditions of the field there's
fantastic right
whitening spycraft by RP is really good
Tony diddlers chapter in historians of
the immediate future
phenomenally good Midler stops the other
random leaving of an entire act of
banished three runs and and so in a way
by I written a kinda if banner wrote a
revisionist history of modernism with
theory design the first Machine Age what
I set out to do here was right in
revisionist history of banner which is
more which looks at the entire corpus as
opposed to just the first half
which I think does just a couple of
things I wanted to push it on there one
of them you mentioned that final triad
that advocates and could you go through
how would you talk a little bit that's
even the second of the third kind of
three rules that you have to live
pronounces made in the course of course
of his life and he did it because he saw
he felt he had seen others you've seen
others effectively promulgate their
notions of what modern is a lot to be
the rest similar kind of similar kind of
trio yeah I mean there's I go through
this there's several charts in the book
that I kind of lay out these various
tripartite definitions of modernism
I may not be able to remember them all
off the top of my head but but so after
bar and if you read the International
style by Hitchcock and Johnson Alfred
Barr actually gives you a much more
precise tripartite definition it's
reflected in the chapters of that but
it's I think illustrated by Porsche to a
certain degree still well so far the
international style set is primarily an
aesthetic understanding that
architecture is from planar volumes
through regular massing and blank
surfaces like that's it those three
things if it was peppered in pioneers in
the modern movement he said that he
doesn't historically and he says that
architecture is basically the shotgun
marriage of Victorian engineering part
of
and craftsmen put those things together
stir about modernism comes out zucchini
gives you the tectonic definition part
of modern a lecture which is
architecture is steel class and hockey
you get this most clearly in his first
book Valentin Frank right and so bad and
looks at those then throughout his
career he starts with the new Brutalism
new Brazil those three things it's as
found materials exposed structure and
memorability is an image that's it
he used a clip on he has a lot that he
has a tripartite definition it's the
high-tech high-tech is bold colors
exposed structure and exposed mechanical
surfaces and then he moves on the
architecture it's you know mainstream
you gravity enclosure and then its final
one is that that MA and this is where it
somehow applies to both architecture and
modernism simultaneously so he's doing
up a bunch of things at the same time
and I also realized this entire
conversation is like serious inside
baseball and I promise it's not quite so
arcane lay down over 75,000 words but
his final definition of modernism which
he writes in the catalogue essay for a
show of a case study houses is clarity
honesty and unity that that's really as
you can see again at McMahon and
becoming incredibly traditional
incredibly conventional and with those
late writings in mind about the early
writings and realize he was that back
and he was like that at the beginning
too and so there's a strange slant to
the way that I think has been
personified and it's not to say that
those other definitions are wrong it's
just to say that everybody is you know
there's always more there there's always
another description that is a Bible
available and so I don't set out in the
book to say but rather than to agree
with banner there are multiple banners
just like there are multiple everybody
and so what you know we could think this
whole business of coming at you where
you know there's three or four jobs
there's three or four beads and and to
try and find a way to write which I
think banner is doing
and when I was trying to echo to try to
find a way to write history that isn't
so determined to find the answer but
rather to find a way that you can hold
multiple versions of the same story in
suspension which i think is how the
world you know I think if we have to
reduce everything to one system you have
to exclude so then politically it's
totally pernicious but it's also just
wrong and less interesting and so I
think a big part of the sort of writer
the ambitions here is that how do you
hold in suspension definitions now
together hand through through enacting
that process a few times over and by
having Catholic tastes that are
sometimes in conflict with one another
becoming kind of self become
something else I just point out that in
London the Greenberger at the same time
in these arguments are happening in
architecture
similarly doctrinaire rules are getting
set up for fine artists and it's
interesting and a broader a broader
discussion of formalism to look at the
together quick but I wanted to try to if
you don't mind closing with looking at
these buildings these are the two
buildings that balance sites in 1918
1988 and I was interested in
architecture for automobiles that's
played out since then there's actually
been quite a bit of contemporary
architecture for automobiles and I'd be
curious to see how we sort of read the
possibilities but after these two after
these two Porsche would go on to build
the Porsche Museum in 2000 2007
German firm of Dylan
and Ferrari would similarly build a
museum designed by Matsui on approves us
and future systems
I actually think 2014 was one the creo
these two buildings seem to kind of echo
fans dialogue the box
the Porsche box is starting to get
slightly more modeled the Ferrari the
Ferrari group skate has become something
closer to an auto body and its
suspension system but the kind of
amplify metaphor there is I think
parallel what a big deal there is that
one is silver and one is yellow so the
same in yellow it's funny that the
Ferrari in Grenoble would use the same
yellow I was wondering if it was
actually corporate kinship the opposite
I think and this was the one I sort of
jumped to times you were talking about
that it's early work but one of the
things that happens in a lot of the new
architecture for Ottomans and I should
say that to me this is you know possibly
the other side of department
a building without architecture a
building beyond architecture to some
degree these buildings for for
automobiles are as much for their for
the car as this for the for the people
and I think it's this precedent that
starts to become researcher in the MW
developed by 2007 where the racetrack is
coursing through the building and
becoming actually the narrative
structure for the muta-do before the
mean for the automotive museum to line
up that track is history
similarly here not a racetrack but a
parking helix this time multiplied three
times out to the model Guggenheim starts
destruction in there I guess in this to
time I wonder about the the issue of
scale that if then if imbalance look at
technology often technology is scaled up
to become buildings that in in the 2000s
in the contemporary discussion of
technology often often a one-for-one
sampling of infrastructure the parking
helix is a racetrack becomes the
architectural expression and then that
may be the way the
characterize this you know the other if
the Fiat Factory in some way is
infrastructure architecture becoming
infrastructure in a way here you have it
much more and so again almost if the
kind of an interesting result of the
seeming drive toward invisibility in
architecture you know so technology
makes things disappear think of the
telephone who had 40 years ago 20 years
ago or three months ago you know like
the last version the technology
generally makes things disappear what
are abandoned argument the more
technology and be pushed into
architecture architectures going to ban
and so if we look at that in terms of
Ipswich or the glass house architecture
vanishes leaving behind landscape
what's interesting about the way that
you set this up it's kind of like if we
push it in a different way
architecture put the in the banished
leaving behind on the infrastructure and
you know that the kind of infrastructure
of roads and circulation becomes the
whole thing it's not a totally worked
out I think story but I think the
dialectic really reassert itself and
these two buildings I do think there's
still in the in the way the spiraling
works in viola of Louisville you see it
we see an abstraction and a stylization
and of the impulse to imagine car
passing through that space in the VW
parking tower you have the very literal
technological places of the automobiles
for coming the architectural expression
right I think that I think two bad ones
point you can still you can still see
things in those terms I think where it
gets where it gets complicated for me
and this is I think Zaza and zaha hadid
importantly if the architects
and it comes of age just as Rainer comes
to general holiday she enters the field
as he needs as he's leaving it and I
think this building sets up a different
set of questions
yeah I think the whole question of
architecture as a as a sonography that
kind of capsule a darker encapsulate the
automobile
my guess is that then that have really
liked these buildings insofar as you
know the Heike kept coming back in these
cars buildings for cars they were really
soon mop regularly whether you go with
the Porsche aesthetic or there were no
aesthetic those two buildings were
really symbolizing the car in some way
and the idea that you know each of the
buildings you're demonstrating kind of
increasing the combination of the car
that how how car who becomes a design
strategy as opposed to simple it still
has kind of symbolic or representational
connotations but I think that that blur
you know a building that is designed to
accommodate automobiles as much as its
design
I think you know it starts to sound a
little like some arguments associated
with object-oriented ontology post
humanism and making an architecture that
has more two accommodating more
constituencies more effectively it's too
bad that he's not around to comment he
was at a point where his thinking was
really changed or that it's thinking it
really kind of crystallized in a way
that his earlier work wasn't quite there
speaking of crystals crystals and I'm
realizing I this is a you know this is
this is a project diet the economics of
which are automotive at this point this
house we finished a few years ago it's
property taxes have been paid three out
of the last five years by auto ass
yeah and so this house has become more a
kind of lighting system for all feels
more frequently and more profitably
so it's good late it is any questions
where we sufficiently I'm sorry to but I
think I brought much to the confusion
top cook is fantastic
[Applause]
[Music]
I'm a big fan of position on target
range because it seems to custody to the
third side where it's not important
right that's sort of the picture
performance and
space-age aesthetic support idea of a
colander which is performance and
aesthetics but
the work of our command actually fits
into either category right or maybe I'm
just misleading in maybe you could talk
a little bit more about how how the idea
of the fiction of performance that ties
into badass thinking well it's I would
say images may be more correct terms and
than fiction but
and constantly come back then the image
has to prevail so that's why our program
wins over center price that's why in a
sense architecture wins or the
performance again and again there's
incredible essence the road lien in his
life of high tech where he is to equate
buildings like Renault with sailor ships
and he talks about the rigging on
sailing ships and maritime superstition
and things like that that's the thing
that you under that you begin to
understand when you look at sailing
ships is in spite of their supposedly
you know deeply functionalist and they
only have what's absolutely necessary
that there's an incredible amount of
superstition involved in a way that
you're organized in the way that a lot
of it is there because of the tradition
and maritime like and he becomes in he
sees that that's the same thing going on
in a lot of these high-tech buildings so
if you look at it say Charles knee
Charles and Ray Eames house in Los
Angeles right as x-bracing that you
would normally need in a steel frame
turns out Li you don't need the xray
sing on the Eaton's house but Charles
Eames insisted that it be there because
it looked better at the expiration
Norman Foster when when Foster and
Rogers were teamed up as team four and
they did a building for Reliance
controls they put an X grazing all over
the thing where they didn't need their
engineer we preserve then they build a
tower that was trying to be a kind of
como citation of the tower of the
Smithson son stand in school the tower
desperately needed experts in foster
wouldn't allow it because there was no
expertise in immense misses and so again
you know this image that there is a
functional story but then it's
reinforced with excessive stuff and so
I'm not totally sure that I made me push
this my
more just a brief points of dark again
questions I think taught to us a
wonderful job of both discussing our
Quran as as a collective endeavor that
create creates a body of work and
looking at the individual voices within
our Capgras and seeing where their
trajectories differ from differ from
that collective project in the 60s I
think it's again an instance where the
the singular and the plural kind of
coexist in there in the architecture
Venom wants to challenge in the way I
think he sees architecture confronting
of the future but it's going to be both
a collective endeavor and kind of
singular visions and I think that's just
a little bit just politics but that
banham Ben was writing in an incredibly
charged period in European American and
in fact you know he's writing he's
writing through benimuz among other
things really the diarist of the Cold
War in our field and you know arguably
the I was struck in that initial
comparison that he that he picks
he picks these two he picks the two
fighters that one world war two the u.s.
airplanes and that and actually the
whole term boffin goes back to that
world war two legacy I think in some
ways phantoms project is to take to take
the consequences of that victory that
the complicated consequences of that
victory and try to imagine what it means
for our field
and what the 60s would how that 60s
would reassess that sense of victory
it's old
that's it still sort of Milan or maybe
are easily
so like one which is sort of modular low
barrier entry cheap and one which is
like super sleek smooth expensive
I think it's it's something that we have
all had to grapple with quite
dramatically its architects over the
last say 30 years manda was writing at a
time where this is I don't like this
phrasing but it's the most accurate
indexical legibility was trying to give
it you know that when you looked at the
thing you knew how it you could read how
it so when you look at it you look at a
car you understand the relationship
between the wheel the ground the
defender when you yeah when you look at
a Greek temple you understand the
relationship between the columns and you
can figure out something visually if
they start having tourism sure and but
then in a world filled with objects like
this you know Mexico legibility of
function is just gone right those that
kind of mechanical causality which
really seems to underlie the visual bank
which other oddities doesn't matter
which one you know they all have a very
clear mechanical explanation and so
banner was writing Zama in some ways the
last gasp of that kind of mechanically
legible visual language and so how how
to deal with something like
because this would in some ways foam
would fall into the high tech category
it looks a lot like the Porsche
cigarette lighter that then and spends a
lot of time writing about the PSA this
book so but I think for me that's really
the crux of it is that we if we find us
it's going back to the idea of legible
mechanical parts all relationships can't
help but be old-fashioned like that's a
deeply old-fashioned way to think about
objects and it's not that parts of
things don't exist anymore
but we a whole new class of objects have
entered the world taken over the world
that just they don't care about that
those distinctions so part of part of
the problem for us now is like these
categories maybe don't work so well that
these are historical categories as well
as opposed to contemporary
when we say that there was interfaces
that were provided
kind of but I think instantiated in
different I mean another different right
so I would really in again in the same
essence under the sailing ships he
invokes Horatio marinas definition of
beauty and into in a very incredible
three or four lines in this tax remember
the name of right now green have said
pieces beauty is the promise of function
then he goes on to say action is the
presence of function and character is
the record of function so bad and really
not this definition blows the doors off
Sullivans form follows my dreams true I
mean it's a much smarter and I think
more useful way to think about the
relationship of action and objects but
there is something about it that the
entire thing is built into function the
super functionalist step
beauty and character looking at these
four things because I think that the
Porsche building is the only one
happened like I look at the steeper and
say that it belongs more with the other
two in terms of its beats exuberance and
its desire to communicate like those
three things that we would buy and the
prosper buildings have a kind of
excessive communication there there
we've received whereas the Porsche
building communicating something that's
very reticent someone different you can
parse this side of the images in a lot
of ways and I think maybe we're engaged
making too much out of it I mean this
was a draft introduction in the Bantam
row
his cover letter made it clear he wasn't
done so he was someone who replies
pretty aggressively so it's not clear
that this comparisons the way Joe
flipped it over you know there's more
Ian's make mistakes everybody true but
maybe pedantic you know he does talk a
little bit about that Porsche about that
Porsche building has a kind of Newton as
a rather ingenious neutral envelope for
a complicated set of programmatic needs
programmatic needs that had certain
adjacencies I was interested in the
later buildings we looked at about how
those become a circuitry you know we're
in the later buildings the diet like
organization is overtaken by a diagram
that isn't in any way evident in the
architecture of this building but I
think in our field in the last 30 years
is huge
