tonight speaker is Mark Ryan founder
founding partner of public work in
Toronto public work is an urban design
and landscape architecture firm folk how
low focused on the my dentist 7 o'clock
tomorrow oh sorry I was going to get
mark for breakfast but I'm not sure if
that's happening public workers in is an
urban design and landscape architecture
firm studio focused on the intelligent
evolution of the contemporary city and I
will get what it really means is they
don't do countryside they don't do
national parks they don't do private
garden they really focus on the city
mark holds a Bachelor of landscape
architecture degree from the University
of Guelph and a master of excellence in
architecture from the Rotterdam der
lager Birla Institute in 2005 after
which he started working with a lien
closer also in Rotterdam four years
later in 2009 he started west 8 Toronto
where he worked on significant projects
as the Governors Island in New York and
the Toronto Waterfront that all of your
minds be familiar with and a few years
later in 2012 with Adam Nicklin he
started public work all the offices
listed 17 selected projects 13 are in
Toronto one might say that that's
obvious as the office is located here
however their international experience
and broad scope would suggest a larger
geographical range instead I would argue
the opposite when Adriana of West 8 was
starting out
I bet that was somewhere in the 80s 87
he made nether the Netherlands and the
heritage of the Dutch landscape object
of sustained study upon moving to
Toronto mark has made Toronto the object
of study he considered this city a
transformative and dynamic field a
moving target in which the designer
operates and steers its direction
designers agency transforms the public
realm and effects urban and natural
systems and invigorates public life this
sustained attention to the two urban
systems in Toronto is an investment in
lasting relationships and the ongoing
development and synthesis of layered and
complex local knowledge Mark and his
team has the capacity to seamlessly move
between scales of urbanity it is evident
that in a short time span mayor mark and
Nick brought a significant contribution
to Toronto significant and fantastic I
should say I will I will briefly touch
upon three examples soon after starting
their firm they started working on
developing the Midtown Toronto public
real vision titled Midtown in focus in
the context of an ongoing upward
expansion of the city at Toronto Public
Works focused on the ground and that's
too dark in here and the consideration
of the quality and connectivity of the
spaces below the public realm became an
urgent quest this project galvanized
their focused on the city and was
awarded the 2015 Canadian Society of
landscape architects National Honor
Award for their project the bentway
public work we
sieved the 2019 honor award in general
design from the American Society of
landscape architects this is just last
year's fantastic this project for the
underside of the Gardiner Expressway
reimagines the city's most divisive
symbol of 20th century transportation
planning as a new model of shared public
terrain and finally public works
designed for the landscape around the
expanded University of Toronto Daniel's
building is none too cozy working with
extreme topography in a flat context
resists the lowest common denominator so
often found in landscape architectural
projects landscapes that are soft and
fuzzy the daniels landscape instead is a
landscape on steroids employing steep
slopes at maximized angles reinforced
with steel electrified irrigated
irrigated and planted with with what
commonly would be called weeds is
pushing the envelope of what a landscape
can be the landscape is no longer a soft
comfortable blanket but a site of
renegotiating our place in the city I
like that please help me welcome mark
Ryan a little bit it's nice it's the
first time I've heard someone actually
interpret our work without having us
really speaking in so many years follow
it's really nice to hear that your take
on our practice in Toronto thank you for
that and
I'm gonna get right started it's really
an honor to be here I want to talk a
little bit about our practice and and
the work that we're doing which is in
progress
I mean everything we do is in progress
but I think our work has developed a
kind of idea that it really is never
finished
and that's something that is kind of it
may be self-evident in a landscape
that's of constantly growing and
evolving and a natural system that is it
retains a dynamism but I I think it's a
certain sensibility that we take on our
work that the projects that remain less
fixed in a way less conclusive are the
ones that so retain their energy their
spontaneity and their excitement at
least and to us and we think that
there's something really valuable in
that way of thinking in in cities in
general just so you know this is this is
public work is about 18 really really
talented really really amazing people
this is some shots of our studio who
come from all kinds of different
backgrounds we have landscape architects
we have architects we have urban
designers we have civil engineers who
then later studied landscape and a whole
vibrant kind of mix and I guess what
what unifies us is that we are all
really primarily focused on the public
realm of cities its policy and that kind
of dedication and focus is sort of you
know it takes a certain kind of mindset
and so despite different disciplinary
background I think that's what unifies
us along with the idea that we can look
at cities as landscapes and we can trace
ideas that are rooted in landscape and
apply them in thinking about cities and
urban environments and that that lens of
a landscape we feel is a kind of vital
addition you could say to particularly
the city that we've been living and
working in the last eight years so this
is a scene just on my way out this
morning to
the train to the airport and our office
is in this building right here and this
is sort of a typical situation in
Toronto extreme growth and development
happening in the Central City
we have a population that's projected to
double over the next 20 years so it's a
very interesting dynamic and kind of
wait city to be working with when you
think about public realm and landscape I
grew up in this city and I I kind of
traced my understanding of Toronto's
evolution sort of to a moment where we
built this tower that you might have
heard of the CN tower and for a little
while it was the large it was the
tallest tower in in the world but it
kind of speaks to to me to the
sensibility about the city that was
craving verticality in a kind of
obsessive way it was sort of it it kind
of in a strange way Toronto's identity
was very linked to how tall its skyline
could be and this was sort of a sort of
strange I think very 70s 80s maybe 90s
perspective on kind of site D of a world
city and I've been fascinated to watch
the last 15 years particularly of
Toronto's evolution where we kind of
moved very quickly from a city that
looked like this to a city that look
like this and if you haven't been up to
Toronto in the last 10 years you might
not recognize it but it's definitely
come check it out now
but the interesting question for me is
that now that we you know we've been
craving for this verticality and this
kind of stature of urbanity and and now
I see the really exciting task as really
focusing then again back to the ground
plain of the city and back to the
you know you know in some ways the the
interrelationships that have been a
little bit forgotten in this quest for
pure construction and urbanization and
in that sense of looking at the city as
a landscape you know we can we could
interpret that or look at that in many
different ways when I think sort of
retro actively some of the projects and
this is one that was very early in our
office a project for a park at the mouth
of a former Creek that was at the former
shoreline of the lake that's been in
filled by Phil over you know over the
last hundred years there's in a way a
kind of strange reconciliation between
the landscapes that preceded the city
and the landscapes that exist today and
in this park we were starting to explore
this watershed that was you know
existent in the last 50 years and then a
system that now looks like this of
buried creeks and engineered water
courses that have become under grounded
into infrastructure and that what sort
of one of the only remains of this this
Creek and this flow of water to the lake
is simply in the in the sewer system so
this was a project really about
recreating the artifact of this former
landscape and reinterpreting that this
Bluff landscape and looking towards the
kind of more contemporary and in some
ways also ancient ways of building like
rammed earth and starting to look at the
the native ecology that would have
existed in this landscape and how there
were traces of them that could be
renewed and to think about a kind of in
a way a project of kind of extreme
restoration and the creation of three
very distinct kind of new habitats for
both natural and ecological life but
also for social life and so the project
really was about sort of this Reese Culp
ting of the great change that exists in
this into the bluff and recreating the
bluff the lowlands and then this upper
terrace and reconnecting and stitching a
very dense neighborhood with a larger
system of open spaces and really trying
to celebrate I think some of it some of
textures of the city that we often lose
especially in Toronto in a neighborhood
surrounded by glass and steel and very
shiny brand-new buildings to sort of
start to bring back the kind of soul
that's really rooted in the textures of
landscape and really kind of immersive
and the other sort of like at the
counter an end to this sort of working
on the public realm in a city that is
growing at an extremely rapid rate is
that we are also engaged in projects
that fundamentally have to create new
public space out of thin air and so
here's a project that is actually a park
that bridges to skyscrapers over the
rail corridor right next to our central
train station in downtown Toronto and
these two towers by Wilkinson air
architects you know will now host a part
that is four stories into in the air and
it lands sort of in a place in the
downtown core that really lacks greenery
and lacks open space and so that's a
kind of wonderful thing to create a kind
of new sense of a landscape in an
unexpected place and so the question is
also about what's the nature of this
landscape
what's its role can it bring
biodiversity yes can it bring social
life can it bring a kind of escape
what's its real sort of role
in you know in in developing the project
we've sort of stressed the idea of
bringing strong biodiversity but also
supporting a kind of social life in a
landscape and so the programming aspect
of this of this project is very
important because because of its removal
from the from the ground of the city and
the sidewalks and the life of at this
active sort of foot of the city at four
stories up it sort of necessitated a
really strong programming sort of
support and so those those demands for
programming which we know are sort of
really important in sustaining the life
of public spaces in this case are
embedded into a landscape so there's a
kind of topographic gesture in the park
that actually hybridizes a number of the
ancillary spaces and a kiosk and food
and beverage service and washrooms and
storage space for for some of the
concert venues and skating facilities
and then of course there there's a
project of of a pure kind of creation of
a landscape in this relatively hostile
and wind blow in place and and and and a
project for really bringing that
textures and biodiversity back to to a
position over this kind of desert of
tracks but I think what sets up to sort
of explain like our practice in
relationship to to the City of Toronto
it's best to sort of talk about a
project that we did over the last four
years of the city called teal core and
it it really stemmed from this challenge
of a doubling population and a downtown
core which is sort of that area of
orange color which is the most dense
population within this three and a half
million dollar sorry three and a half a
million population city that was a
really kind of starved for physical open
space you can see a lot more green areas
serving the kind of peripheral parts of
the city but in the very core there
hadn't there there wasn't sort of the
same inherited structure of open spaces
that
many other cities might have already had
built so in a way there was this this
challenge of how to work with what
already exists and how to sort of start
to evolve certain pieces of
infrastructure or certain aspects of the
city form to lend themselves to this
more sense of openness within a feeling
of congestion and this these are two
images of the of Toronto it's just
slightly gazing you know moving the gaze
a little bit beyond the central skyline
and we actually uncover uncover like
these vast areas of of landscape and
then they're stunning and this is our
River Valley the Don River which you
know it's carved by glaciers 12,000
years ago it's really a back door of the
city it's people who use it love it but
it's not well connected to the city we
have incredible islands that come off
the shore and these outer layers of
islands are unbelievably like oases when
you go there you feel like you're lost
you look one direction you see nothing
but the horizon and these images were a
way for us to reefa Miller eyes herself
with the city that we forget we are
surrounded by they took these on there's
amazing helicopter rides around the city
which was just like a stunning
experience but to think about the bay as
actually a space in itself it's it's
it's almost the scale of the city and
our thinking back to the idea of the
tower as a measure of our you know
stature the for me these were real
amazing reminder of the scale and
majesty of this landscape that in some
ways I'd say eclipses the scale of the
growth of the city and how to think
about existing public spaces in the
network of parks that are within
communities but feel kind of fragmented
stretches of infrastructure that are
linear and connected
but don't tap into enough of the larger
natural systems and it led us to a kind
of reading generally of the city of
these sort of two constituent parts and
a morphology of of landscape
particularly the topography of the city
and the natural features of the of this
of this city structure in conjunction
with this the grid and the kind of this
very colonial grid of Toronto and how
those two morphologies don't share
enough interrelationship and that there
are so many places in Toronto in a way
like this where there are these sort of
like collisions of the two systems that
don't allow for an exchange to be a and
for us this was sort of like the next
the next 50 years of projects in Toronto
to start to reactivate and re weave back
these two systems which are somehow
fundamentally kind of create the public
experience of being in Toronto this
amazing vitality of urban life and
there's amazing kind of natural
landscapes and so we we looked at a
larger scale and thinking
comprehensively about what a downtown
parks system might look like if we start
planning for the next 50 years because
in fact there hadn't ever been one made
there was a sort of what they called a
central area plan made in 1976 but it
never holistically looked at public
realm as a whole it just thought about
green spaces and it didn't start to
weave a more contemporary understanding
of what constitutes the public realm in
today's City and so this is an overlay
of the grid sort of predominant grid
Street structure in Toronto downtown
with the former morphology of creeks and
therefore kind of river valleys and and
ravine scapes and as in looking at the
city today we sort of almost like
squinting started to look
for a kind of latent pattern or a latent
system that was there and in some ways
we've started to see the potential for a
thickened loop that would actually kind
of unify the many kind of edges of the
downtown that we sort of almost
discovered that our central downtown was
encircled by a system of landscapes of
different nature
some of them known really well like here
the Don River Valley to the east and you
saw images of the islands that kind of
wrap around and then to others that
really are still quite hidden hidden in
plain sight in some ways the the
northern bluff which is the shores of a
30 thousand year old glacial lake called
Lake Iroquois which is a strong kind of
rise in the topography of the city that
defines out of that northern the end of
downtown and then the West is the kind
of revival of a series of parks and and
and landscapes that form loosely this
garrison Creek and all together so
they're like aha moment in is that this
actually represents a huge amount of
open space and then and this was
important in talking and thinking about
how in some ways without having done 50
years of planning to integrate growth
development with new public spaces how
we could start to think into tapping
into this resource in an intelligent way
there's something very home steadying
about thinking in this way like you can
refer to projects he did in Boston for
example the Emerald Necklace but how we
can start to even like change our
imagination of the way the city and this
sort of system of open spaces might we
might interact with so as a counter to
that we started to look at the other
domain that sort of had been forgotten
over the last 50 years by transportation
engineers which was really the design of
Street scapes and streets right-of-ways
which is an incredible terrain amount of
terrain
in public ownership its truly public
space and just looking at sort of the
predominant grid of you know about 12 or
the kind of primary signature streets of
the city there's a huge vast terrain and
the prot this the study looked at twelve
of those streets and started to think
about starting to sculpt the kind of in
a way vocation for each of one of those
streets in the future and some of that
was to do with climate adaptation in
terms of resilient streets that had a
role in terms of water absorption others
were more about creating more dynamic
urban vital lively streets but
University Avenue is one of them that I
want to just share and it was one of our
oldest boulevards it's so amazing alley
of chestnuts about 150 years ago and
this is the street today still really
quite monumental and formal it has the
central boulevard and lanes of traffic
on either side our proposal was to not
look at University Avenue just as this
isolated strip down the middle which
connects our equivalent of a state
legislature with our with our City Hall
but to think of expanding that by
slightly reducing Lane widths of the
traffic and reorganizing how the lanes
were structured to create this kind of
wider linear park that would actually
connect back to City Hall and and a big
sort of civic precinct here and then
branch into the University of Toronto
which was right adjacent and has an
extensive connected public space network
and the result in sort of rethinking
University Avenue in terms of
rebalancing with cars actually isolated
to one side and then a contiguous public
realm that reaches out from existing
parks it's sort of like very quickly the
creation of a nine-acre linear park and
kind of rebalancing of you know the role
of our streets not just as as conduits
for cars but also for you know for life
and for health and for climate change
and this is happens to be the street
where most of the hospitals in Toronto
line so the idea of access to nature and
a mental health and all the research
based on that starts to have even more
significant meaning so this was a as a
proposal actually to see how that strip
isolated strip of land that exists today
could start to be linked to an ID to a
65 acre kind of precinct that was much
larger here's a view of that sort of
from the legislature looking back south
and connecting into the U of T campus
and that way of thinking of sort of
thinking of our existing assets like the
parks that exist not independently but
in relation to other elements so in
relation to other streets in relation to
it even like borrowed landscapes from
schools or churches or cemeteries starts
to give you a different kind of way a
map of thinking about neighborhoods that
are actually centered around parks so
this was just an approach to thinking
about about 12 Park District's that we
called them which effectively were about
how Park neighborhoods with existing
parts could be reconnected via Street
scapes to areas that had some landscapes
that could be expanded upon and this
just as it was a template that we
started to explore with the city that
started to name all kinds of
opportunities where you could start to
recenter neighborhoods around green
spaces and within the study there were
also some sort of very long range and
more heavy infrastructural ideas like
the idea of rail deck Park which is sort
of a once-in-a-generation kind of
opportunity that would only land at the
right time and we're probably not there
for it yet in Toronto but almost like in
Hudson Yards in New York City where they
had the idea where land values are so
high on either side and surrounding this
in the very center of the city that
actually making a deck over the sunken
rail corridor might might make sense to
sort of this very rare and special
moment where the city could kind of
unify these two sides of downtown with
the 21 acre park and and you know these
are sort of you know in some ways the
project was really about how they're
when you start thinking a long term how
you have to have a whole spectrum of of
approaches and some of those are
actually extra large like this that
aren't intended that there are only
intended to happen at the right moment
and other ones are very actionable like
Queens like like University Avenue where
that's all in public ownership it's
ready to go it's really just about
reallocating I think the things you have
and then there's a whole sort of other
scale that gets to the extra-small which
is really about these kind of tiny
little confetti of small park heads we
call them in Toronto laneways
schoolyards other kind of ancillary
spaces that you could say are all the
Overlook landscapes of the city and how
actually by changing sometimes city
policy around those things people can
have more access or benefit more from
their proximity so that that kind of
overall project was was really important
for us as an office because it gave us a
chance to think comprehensively about
the whole city that we practice in and
the output is basically a report that
got approved by City Council but starts
to structure you know 50 years basically
of future projects at all scales but
that means that the work we do sort of
now in Toronto is is very well informed
by like the interrelation like kind of
the interrelationship of things and so
there is no project that we can't
situate into a larger system and I think
that's sort of really important in our
mentality about working which is of
course easier to do when you're really
grounded in a place and you ground it in
its culture and you know it very well
but so so coming back to this idea of a
city in the landscape this is more
reflective I thought I'd talk about
three projects a little bit more
and two of them all I mentioned and and
maybe see how in different ways they
relate to an idea of sort of thinking of
the city as in a landscape and maybe
more maybe even more further embracing
the in-progress nature of projects in
cities and so we'll start with the the
Daniels Faculty of architecture
landscape and design at the University
of Toronto it exists it existed as a
kind of isolated island on the edge of
the University of Toronto campus an old
historic building called Knox College
some isolated parking lots
you know landscapes they're really hard
to get to because of traffic flow it
also it's a haunted building officially
that's fact and but it's one of the
exceptions to Toronto's grid there it is
up there this banana circle one of the
very few exceptions to this grid in an
amazing position with views down to the
lake so situated on this very strong
north/south axis and breaking this kind
of island island effect and this sort of
strong east/west undeniable kind of
force of that axis was sort of one of
the really important start starting
points or ballistically and and there
was sort of some tracing to its original
structure in the city as a landscape in
fact it was these kind of agricultural
part tears that existed in the
nineteenth century and then we've known
it most most contemporarily in the city
as sort of having this north and south
relationship and mainly just in terms of
its view and the idea really because
this structure is one of the western
edges and gateways of the campus was to
really start to think about turning this
clock and allowing it to have a more
responsive relationship so starting to
think about actually the the front door
being in fact related to Russell Street
which is a kind of important spine that
leads to the heart of campus and
allowing these other entrances north and
south to take on in some ways a restored
characteristic of the historic outlook a
totally transformed and fundamentally
different relationship to the north and
then re-establishing some more community
relationships to the neighborhood to the
to the west and so you know it's always
interesting when you start to sort of
create a lust rate of drawings about a
project you move through detailed design
and create tender documents and then you
see a place and it's wonderful when
people go up in drones and send you
pictures that they've taken of the
project to see how that that texture has
kind of evolved and I like this view
because it starts to show that that new
entrance at Russell Street on the plaza
that's created and here you see the
really exciting kind of interface
between this the old nineteenth-century
neo-gothic building and sort of stunning
the stunning addition by nadir Taurani
and Katie Faulkner of nada which really
have this kind of Jekyll & Hyde kind of
relationship and we really we really
tried to build upon that wonderful kind
of moment of that scene between the
buildings and think about how this could
be a landscape experienced as you
revolve that kind of like promotes this
kind of inclination to move traffic that
already does it the streetcars our tram
system goes around this cycling lanes go
around this but to use every sort of
aspect of the landscape to sort of
create this processional kind of ring
that would invite movement and so here's
the sort of southern tip which is very
loyal to I think the sort of historic
character and serenity of the
of the historic facade and there's here
you start to see a network of paths that
you know give access to key entry points
but also establish a perimeter route as
you move around the clock this becomes
this is the eastern entrance which
become sort of the main student access
point and the plaza is created here with
this south-facing slope and there's a
kind of change in the in the treatment
of the ground it begins with this very
say somehow formal and respectful series
of native grasses and and and kind of
historic gardens with preserved trees
which which were really important in
kind of preserving that sense of the
facade and actually the old the old
trees that are existed on-site and then
the beginnings of these kind of new
inflections of a topography that rise
and actually reach reach their extreme
it's about 21 feet high this is kind of
like echoing that like a moment of that
that kind of almost gothic inspired peak
and this is where it gets a little bit
unruly this is sort of like around the
clock where it gets it sort of most
extreme we knew we had sort of limited
tools at our disposal so we resorted to
I think the fundamental sort of
landscape materials of moving earth and
some excavation was necessary at the
North facade to create this interesting
interrelationship with the lower it's
called the North Terrace is sort of
interfaced with the fabrication labs in
the lower level so basically a simple
operation of moving earth on site and
you know resisting you know sending all
this fill to the landfill site but
actually to use it and resituated to
create a new
a new topography particular in the north
half of the circle so you can see sort
of where cut was was made for various
things like the lower level some of the
cisterns and infrastructure and then
where it was redeployed sort of more
sculpturally to give a completely
different reading of the north half of
this circle and because it's you know
this is a place of learning and this is
an exciting kind of place where
architects landscape architects and
urban designers come together to think
about cities we also thought it was very
important to be showing demonstrations
of different kind of methods of
construction some some very traditional
and others borrowed more from
infrastructure so we have mechanically
stabilized earth walls here you know and
applied kind of technologies for more
engineering applications to build these
repositories of soil really and here's
that you can see them sort of laying in
lifts and creating this south-facing
slope which we lovingly called Darwin's
Hill which has sort of been that kind of
experimental ground within the sort of
in some ways reserved parts of the
circle like we've kind of isolated this
this one topographic element is the sort
of place of experimentation and testing
there there is a a bleacher timber
bleacher that was value engineered
unfortunately here that will be
hopefully added but in the near term its
what kind of a wonderful
slope this outer this outer this outer
landscape here is really a battleground
of spontaneous urban plants duking it
out for who will who will thrive most
and when you walk by there if you can
you hear the most amazing sounds of
birds and bees that you could the inner
side of that slope is an experimental
garden that we see as having rotational
faculty faculty led installations the
first is simply a catalog or taxonomy of
native species to the Toronto area that
are suitable for naturalization and
they're listed alphabetically from end
to end
those are visible from the studio so
when they look out there's a big glass
curtain wall and it looks out on this
directly onto this this slope and I love
that because for landscape students to
start to see actual plant material going
in at a young age and actually through
their studies to see it grow to see the
difference growth rates to be able to
look at form and texture and get a feel
for plant materials we think is really
important and there's a kind of also
pedagogical you could kind of read the
landscape if you walk around it
and the professors there sort of have
all the drawings that we created so they
you know for their site engineering
classes they're out there and they can
understand what our 2 to 1 slopes what
did those look like what did 3 to 1
slopes look like 1 a 1 1/2 1 and I
wanted to and etc and what are the
different methods of stabilizing those
kinds of slopes and and how are they
performing so there's a kind of aspect
of moving around the site and
interpreting it and understanding sort
of that this tree has 35 cubic meters of
soil volume and how is it how is it
going to grow using Silva cells and
there's an oh there's this another tree
on the opposite side
in structural soils with the equivalent
amount of soil so there's sort of room
to sort of be following this landscape
as it as it grows and these are our team
was out there a couple of times because
we've been trying to explore how how to
think about different ways of working
with these these sort of experimental
steep walls we've left a few of them
with the maintenance team at the
University to be non maintained and
we've been trying various different
regimes of maintenance just to test sort
of the outcomes with different methods
so those are every kind of steep slope
the 60-degree slopes are becoming sort
of the experimental walls and they're
really woolly I mean I love this is what
I'm really like really excited to see
them kind of coming to look coming to
life when you're down at the North
Terrace and looking up you really lose
the city there's a kind of sense of just
disappearing almost so if you have very
different vantage points
I just let that one fly let's see so you
have these kind of extreme prospects on
the city and then there's almost sense
of disappearing from it which is really
a practical when you're stressed out and
so here's sort of some of the scenes and
there you see that wonderful
interrelationship with the Fablab the
other sort of reality of the site on
this circle was driven by budgets and
the fact that we knew there would be a
lot of concrete in the project for the
hardscapes by necessity of loading and
and circulation and maneuvering and so
it was really important that the project
didn't feel like the sidewalks that
surrounded the project and so we use the
kind of white sand in concrete to get a
really lighter surface and then we use
these we had these amazing diamond
groove saws that were adapted from these
agricultural applications where they
would use them on barns for barn floor
so that cattle wouldn't slip and and it
helped to produce this sort of density
of lines that start to inform practical
things but also kind of suggest where
areas of occupation might be I'm kind of
inspired by this all the way so there's
a sort of overview of it's from the
north side you see there's something
taras yeah ii ii project is sort of
really building off the teo core
assessment of the city as sort of really
lacking lacking public realm and then
and then this question of how do you
find it in unexpected places and how
also as toronto Torontonians get used to
living in a bigger city how they also
start to recognize that we can't find
public realm that is a little bit more
on traditional and we discover sort of
different ways to be together not just
in my art traditional green parks and so
the bentway it was exciting because it
you know it's it's a real sense of the
unexpected - you know this was the
expressway that has bisected our
downtown for sixty years it's been a
controversial thing since it was born
and the interesting thing is that it
slices and connects you know a series of
neighborhoods that have never really had
a strong interrelationship and the
project starts to become a point of
gravity for how they they could come
together there's a practical
connectivity of like in terms of active
recreation cycling and and so the trail
is very important from that regard but
it's it's much more fluid it's it's less
about sort of an end to end experience
and more about how it you move into it
and through it from different points I
love this image it shows that moment of
construction where you see the kind of
anatomy of the structure and it's sort
of the inheritance of this heavily
engineer amazing Expressway is it's sort
of this sense of rooms and when you when
you go there even before the project it
was an incredible incredible credible
space I mean had
and of monumentality that's really rare
so it was almost like it was almost
better it was amazing you know as it was
and so somehow the project was about
resisting the urge to destroy it
in many in many ways there when we we
visited often and you see these these
moments where the light would actually
make the concrete feel warm and that was
a real exciting moment we worked with a
wonderful landscape lighting designer in
Linnea to net to let and out of those
conversations
the lighting approach is less about even
the night illumination and more about
how the daytime sense of illumination
could be could be developed and this
sort of idea that from every from every
contextual clue we could almost
translate and evolve a palette of of
materials and approaches for our
interventions so we were really very
much guided by by what was there and how
any additions which were really more
about supporting and enabling
programming and occupation and use more
than anything would sort of be guided by
that sensibility and and the thinking
that a kind of resilient landscape that
could handle difficult salt water
conditions and processing some of the
the storm water would also be in a way
symbolic and indicative of this being a
former shoreline if those trails and
pathways and networks were actually once
tracing this former lake shoreline of
course that was built out by Phil about
a hundred years ago
so these are some images of the project
we were interested in how in again in
thinking about having to add the trail
and adding having to add hardscape how
we could still make this feel not like
an instant brand new place but actually
have a bit of soul and character and
also be resourceful about how we treated
material life cycles this is on the top
of this image is one of the most amazing
places in Toronto as a landscape you
have to go there if you visit its the
Leslie Street spit this is basically a
beach that has been formed by 60 years
of dumping the construction debris of
you know in many cases some of our most
historic buildings when we didn't care
about preserving them so then they get
washed up onto Shore these amazing
bricks and porcelain and and all kinds
of stuff you can recognize toilet bowls
things like that but you can also like
find basically an old 19th century a
bank building we were able to because it
was just about its last load they were
closing this very unique landscape and
we were able to to harvest some of that
material and use it as a source for
creating mixes in the concrete so we
kind of like one of the project was
about how we could kind of create these
very particular Bentley mixes that would
lend a little more warmth to the
concrete I mean this is a concrete
structure that we are under and the last
thing we wanted was to sort of
kind of mimic that and green green is a
kind of reoccurring color as well
because that's the only color paint that
the expressway uses when they paint the
metal elements but we were we'd sort of
developed these it mixes and into the
trail and into the markings and these
were the original numerix that that
identified every bent column structure
those became part of the wayfinding
design and there's sort of this
reinterpretation of this shoreline
materials in the project that are also
conducive to drainage but also using for
public for pub for defining some of the
public areas
harvesting rocks that became water
features what's kind of you know quite
interesting as a from even in the first
phase from n 10 there's very distinct
atmospheres under this kind of
relatively homogeneous strip and some of
that be is because of the light levels
and the height the changing height of
this structure but one of the things
that really was like central and you
know in our thinking and in our practice
is is how on one hand the design of the
physical environment is often seen as
the kind of object of a designer and
their and their efforts but for this
project particularly it was like how we
could think about the design of the
physical environment but also the kind
of enabling infrastructure that would
allow for public life to happen and with
that lens sort of leavin from the
outside we were starting to think of
this area more defined by the activities
that could be possible here and
especially in this unique environment
there was a very different from end to
end kind of adjacent communities that
live very close to this on one on one
side and the other end where there's
actually a really high high ceiling and
and no neighbors and so that started to
like define conceptually a framework for
the difference between these zones but
ultimately it was about how we could
kind of enable this infinite kind of
curatorial approach that others the
producers
and the people who would be operating
this park could just run with and and I
think this project for us was
eye-opening because it maleeh the
creating the model to sustain life in
this park was almost more important in
the design of the spaces themselves so
the the creation of the project also
created a Conservancy that was the
management entity that would operate and
maintain the space and in Toronto that
was a new thing it's very common in the
u.s. to have parks conservancies
like Central Park for example there's
sort of one of the first but they they
they kind of manage and create these
amazing pop-ups that like you feel the
seasonal life and everything has to
perform many duties so the trail becomes
a skating rink you know the fleet of
furniture was also really important how
it could be super robust how it could
tolerate all kinds of different ways of
being intermingled adapted joined
together pulled apart also that it's
skateboarders could use it to grind on
that it was really not fussy at all and
very kind of as hardcore as that
structure itself big big heavy-duty
tables on wheels and so they're like
everything was sort of about how you
could match in a way the the strengths
of this structure but let it still be
very human and you know so in one end of
the project strong gate there's this
interesting coupling of creating a
public Belvedere kind of lookout space
but and also having below creating a
building structure with you know public
washrooms there's a green room for
performers because this was the area
where we're promoting performance
you know starting to think about
baffling sound and basically disease
room start to come to life through the
project and one of the critical ideas
was really how we could think of the
supporting armature of the place itself
this was sort of the the I think most
bent way breakthrough of the project was
to understand from at first through our
intuition that this 1950s engineered
structure could hold more than just the
cars that drove on top of it but then
working with our amazing structural
engineers Blackwell to actually analyze
every column and and and realize that
they were there was they were they were
not working at nearly close to capacity
and most of the in fact the columns
themselves or were only working at about
25 percent capacity
so we developed with them like a whole
system of kind of supports that would
strap on and and adhere to this
structure all complain with the
transportation authorities which was a
challenge but but but one of one in
particular to enable hanging and to
basically think of converting this roof
into a metropolitan scale rigging
element so this is not just a roof that
supports cars is actually the roof that
would enable a very unique kind of form
of public public programming and the
best way for us to test it was to test
them the extreme which was to hang a
pedestrian bridge and so with working
with blackwell this amazing friction
clamp column became tested with to
handle the loads of hanging bridge
this is not part of the phase that was
just built but it's part of the next
phase to create a pedestrian and cycling
crossing that is hung and supported by
the bridge itself some of the drawings
and the climax of that bridge is sort of
this amazing view of the one of the this
National Historic Site which is right
next to the project the old
fortification of the city and it's
actually because of the ramparts you
can't actually see into it so this
bridge would actually offer you one of
the only and rare views into into that
landscape so we're sort of looking
forward to the future phase where the
the bridge would be built and also that
the skating trail would be extended and
the idea of this like this the skating
trails been hugely successful like the
embracing of winter if you can imagine
for Canadians is so important and to
really use the the roof which is you
know proves to be really useful in bad
weather whether it's rain that actually
this starts to become this wonderful
shelter and it's been great for the the
ice ring because on those sunny winter
days it actually preserves really the
quality of the ice this idea is to
extend it to the local library that's
just off the picture so you could
actually skate to get books and that
would actually reinforce the idea of it
this is sort of following that contour
of the former light and it's always
important for me to like to mention that
this was so unique as a project in
Toronto because it was driven by
philanthropy this was a donation by this
this couple to create this public space
and basically
catalyzed you know the the Conservancy
and the ongoing operations of this and
now it's a partnership between this
Conservancy and the City of Toronto and
Waterfront Toronto so it's a really a
wonderful story of philanthropic
collaboration and and I think you know
the things that have been happening it
are in it are the is what's exciting
about it it's become a venue for culture
it's become a venue for community and as
we kind of always liked and knew from
the start it was never gonna be about
the design we made it was only gonna be
about the things that could happen in it
and that was really the object and I
think that's just a different way of
thinking that was so important we have
III can stop there I had I have a
heavy-duty project after this so maybe
it's it's a maybe maybe that's a good
place to stop yeah I'll come back
another time and talk to you about this
very heavy-duty project thank you so
much
[Applause]
um we'd like to open up the room for
questions that you might have for mark
hey Forbes
just sort of a whole like presentation
on the logistics of making that happen
which is like so interesting all they're
like very quickly there was something
this happened at a very instrumental
moment the city this this expressway as
I said was 60 years old it had never
basically been repaired in 60 years they
had just basically built it and let it
degrade so there's a stretch from
basically the start of the bentway going
all the way west which underwent a 1.5
billion dollar rehabilitation that the
city paid for to keep this expressway
and it's a very controversial because
Toronto has had a chance to maybe think
about taking it down and so you can
imagine is it up is it down as it up is
it down it's up and it's being invested
heavily in to keep it holding cars so
after one and a half billion dollars of
rehab
the Judy and will Mathews donated twenty
five million dollars to enable basically
this this this project to begin and they
knew that that wasn't going to be the
end of the project it was simply to
begin it and we were able to benefit
from the fact that a lot of the kind of
repair work had sort of put this in a
reasonable state of good repair and then
the project basically was trying to very
resourceful II do every I mean it's a
big area so it's it's about it's about
seven acres so twenty-five million
actually goes very fast there was not a
lot of civil infrastructure here so a
lot of that had to go underground but so
many of the moves are about like how do
you know again how we are working with
topography here sort of minimizing stuff
that we had to card out and just working
with a construction manager who was on
this project to kind of optimize it but
the city was really and the mayor
particularly you can imagine the
political message
after spending this amount to just keep
the cars moving it was a wonderful thing
to have a private citizen make a
donation to the public realm which is in
Toronto rarely done is often to
healthcare and other universities but it
was the biggest ever to the public realm
that's the city just ran like was so
supportive of this led by the mayor and
basically galvanized all city staff to
sort of become partners in this and that
changed the kind of way of you know in
Toronto we have a lot of red tape as
many cities do and bureaucracies this
kind of amazing spirit of generosity
combined with this moment where
politically I think doing something good
with this infrastructure was really
important that I think those to dovetail
to make this happen and then the fact
that there's it everything's about
collaboration so there's some of this
area that's actually publicly owned and
there's some of this area that's
nationally owned and some of its you
know City and provincial and then
there's privately owned pieces so it's a
it's a real collage of ownership and it
continued that continues to be a story
about how it gets completed in some ways
first phase through the public lands and
then in future phases through private
yeah well the the chance like teal color
for us this big big comprehensive plan
of the city was was kind of a first
dream because it allowed us to do
something we would have wanted to do
anyway which sort of like really take a
reading of the city that we're working
in through that project and you know
there's so many it like we we just
scratched the surface of basically all
the new you know next the next next
century's this or this century's
challenges and so many of those are
about climate change many of those many
of those also in Canada are about truth
and reconciliation
which is you know repairing our
relationships with the indigenous
population so these two forces climate
change adaptation and truth and
reconciliation in the context of public
realm design I think is sort of the
domain that we're very excited to be
working with and this is very
challenging domain that's a very
uncharted domain when you put those
three things together it's very natural
for climate change and public realm to
go together but the idea of bringing
indigenous voices to the table and and
changing our ideas of authorship and
collaboration these to these kinds of
these kind of weaving would be very
exciting to see our city kind of
especially like when I think about
Toronto to think of Toronto actually
making contributions on its own terms
then it's sort of back to my image of
the CN tower like my childhood of
remembering the city just idolizing
New York and London and Chicago and
never truly kind of getting comfortable
with its own skin which is how I feel
Toronto is right now in a great way so I
didn't totally answer it but yeah
something around
[Applause]
