thank you all for coming out on this
special Friday lecture so tonight we
have the super pleasure of the joy of
really working with Sarah I know I mean
really it's been a good and so it's also
my pleasure to introduce her tonight but
I think she needs probably less of an
introduction than most people but so
just to give you like her some of the
kind of biographical things you may not
know Sarah not only earned NMR from MIT
but also before that a master's in
modern culture and media from Brown
University at MIT where we were
classmates
she graduated in 2011 where she
the Lawrence B Anderson award the Opera
Oh China of the Marjorie Pierce
fellowship her work has been published
in future interior cloth thresholds and
Mark magazine after school she she spent
a long time in San Francisco where she
worked the rap studios
I've taught at UC Berkeley so this year
Sarah's been here at Knowlton where her
work has been dealing with comedy and
other say unpredictable ways of looking
at things and so when I was sort of I've
been trying to like pull out what
Sarah's been working on I guess recently
but she's been sort of tight lipped
about it so I was thinking a little bit
about comedy and one sort of version of
comedy which I think maybe is a kind of
clue to the way that that I think sarah
has always worked or at least that
actually tries a new asteroid and his
sort of model of last year which is that
something that makes us laugh is the
human becoming mechanical was his
account today and by this he means
something like when a person sort of
slips on a banana peel and falls over
this makes us laugh because a person
which is a kind of complex and body
thing with you know feelings and
thoughts and so on and so forth suddenly
it becomes like a lump of matter and
it's sort of like succumbs to the
Phoenix right which is to say that
comedy is a kind of a way of looking at
things
in a strange way which also produces a
sense of pleasure right so it's a look
at a person as like a local matter and
then to laugh about it basically and so
I think that you know Sarah's work for a
long time has dealt with like questions
of appropriation and authorship and in
some ways this is maybe like a new a new
series of explorations this year that I
think she's been working on but to me
this is sort of way of looking at things
let's say strangely and to produce a
kind of sense of joy
out of that that mode of looking at
things strangely has been something
that's that in my opinion has sort of
always characterized for work and
something that I'm really excited to see
tonight so please join me in welcoming
Sarah hurt you can might prefer that
Curtis give this lecture because it
might have been hard to kind of tease
out from me what I've been up to because
I haven't quite been sure what it was
for quite a while up until kind of
recently when it started gelling and
coming together but before I start
talking about the work I'd like to thank
all of you for being here and for being
part of kind of the research and
experience of being here as the Lefevre
fellow I want to thank the KSA broadly
for the incredible opportunity that the
Lefevre Fellowship has afforded me
basically to just kind of read which is
not as
that I've done in any great length or
seriousness of purpose in years up until
now and I think they're I suspect that
I'll continue absorbing a lot of the
information that's been input for a
while I can see and I've had the chance
to read to think and to absorb
information a different pace than I have
before and I'm grateful for that if the
space I've had to mull over ideas and
inspirations has been an incredible
luxury and I'm just really happy to
share the the smidge of what I can
translate out of what's forming in my
head for you tonight
so one of the effects of this open-ended
embrace of research that I've taken on
this year has been affording myself the
ability to go down a number of different
paths to test a few propositions without
a clear notion of what the outcome might
be and though I've known that this day
and lecture has been coming since I
signed on for the adventure I really
didn't know what form or format it would
take until recently and I think there's
probably like six different versions of
this some of which involve like
tap-dancing
the best damn band in the land and
others of which are maybe a little more
traditional which is what you're gonna
see tonight I'm grateful to this
community generally but I also want to
thank Doug graph and KB Jones for
rolling out an exceptional red carpet in
Columbus and showing me the city and
points east and all of the best yoga
studios in town and related to the
production of what you'll see in the
exhibition that opens
shortly after this talk I have a lot of
people to thank including especially
last night's graveyard shift
Riley McNeil David Kozan and Zach's
Lansky who were still smiling this
morning which I am so impressed by Nate
Leach judo in the glass shop Tyler young
Ryan red Marty Kolsch and especially
Michael bomb burger who probably I don't
know if Mike is here but I suspect that
the first time we met to talk about some
of the projects I wanted to do he knew
that they were insane but he didn't let
on and I am grateful
for that and then finally a huge thank
you to James Amma Khan who is dressed
similar to me to make my research
assistant who served as a sounding board
a production assistant a devil's
advocate and expert consultant a reality
check and good company over the course
of this year and who I and we have very
much to thank for the actual execution
of the projects that you'll see this
evening so when I presented my proposal
for the Lefevre fellowship project last
year and have recently closed an
exhibition that I think Curtis referred
to called unfair use that animal yaki
and I produced initially for the center
of architecture in New York unfair deuce
was a kind of hybrid research and
speculation exhibition where we
collected and presented 50 tropes and
what we called fair use moves that were
sufficiently ubiquitous in contemporary
architecture that we felt comfortable
declaring them open for all to use free
from fear of plagiarism or accidental
copying implicit in the presentation was
the idea that architecture has always
been up for grabs and made up of fair
use moves what uses precedent analysis
if not to capitalize on the
that have come before and that notion
that the notion of unfairness or some
kind of line between permissible and
impermissible copying is a wholly recent
invention designed to serve the needs of
others beyond the discipline we found at
least three citations for each fair use
move effectively providing a shorthand
zeitgeist defense for anyone accused of
improper appropriation we also named
these moves here in the top row we have
from left to right hyper lofted slabs
cylinder and shutters a quick shorthand
for the general shapes as I discussed
the show with the visitors and this is
the kind of centerfold we included in a
newspaper broad sheet that visitors got
when they came to the exhibit as I
discussed the show with visitors and
wrote about it I was struck by how many
people myself included we're looking
within the work of selection and
curation that we did for a kind of meta
conceptual analysis looking for recipes
for how to combine elements to
predictable or reliable ends and knowing
that others have done it before what did
it mean to invoke the pyramid form and
for how long would that remain true did
each use of a trope or form carry with
it the same baggage as the last or was
there a way of simultaneously meaning
different things further was there a way
to of intentionally manipulating the use
of precedent to produce an intended
outcome all of this was beginning to
sound suspiciously like analyses of
meaning making in language and we know
speaking of architecture is a language
that has distinct communicative value
uncool and a little bit awkward and it's
wrapped up with a lot of the claims we
associate broadly with postmodern
architecture and the various values of
reference and citation to combat the
awkwardness with my proposal for the
Lefevre project
I aim to study a very distinct and
narrow area of language comedy and
specifically in the pun because it
contains all the weird shape-shifting
multi meaning stuff as language
generally but condensed into a discrete
form that follows clear rules
moreover comedy has an appreciable
effect it creates laughter and happiness
the pun seemed like a useful vehicle for
discovering where and how a few simple
shape-shifts perhaps addressing the
moves that had been distilled in the
earlier unfair use project could be
brought to bear and controlling the way
that associations and references can be
made so when you tell people that you're
interested in studying comedy in
relation to architecture the first
question sometimes the second but
usually the first question has something
to do with either the basket building
especially here in Ohio or buildings
that look like other things
ducks while I am very impressed very
interested and impressed and what it
means to design and build the basket
building or to work inside of a duck
store I'm also interested in things that
are less obviously or outwardly comic in
the slapstick or quickly digested sense
and more interested in capitalizing on
the complicated way that comedy often
works in our minds how humor Risa's the
social wheels and promotes connection
are positive feelings of uh or optimism
and excitement I want to start with a
couple different stories and hopefully
those stories will seed ideas that pop
up throughout the rest of the talk to
make a bit of sense though I should make
clear that from the start I'm not after
sense-making I'm still in a pre
hypothesis state on the questions that
I've brought with me to Columbus
questions of meaning making in
architecture and what a syntactical
analysis of comedies linguistic
operations might reveal as potentials
within architecture I've not been
looking to prove anything specific
mainly just looking and seeing what I
find so this talk could also be seen as
an over justified resistance to the
making of sense drive in architecture a
discipline where so much doesn't make
sense and
rates intuitively but we're so much
energy is expended in the explanatory
narrative comedy conveniently offers
inroads for how one might overturn a
straightforward explanatory narrative
and offers a model for happily operating
at the fringes of the necessary and the
required so as Curtis suggested let's
start with Freud and his jokes and their
jokes and their relation to the
unconscious one point that strikes me as
especially profound is the
identification of the importance of the
third person in a joke Freud writes a
joke is this a double-dealing rascal who
serves two masters at once everything in
jokes that is aimed at gaining pleasure
is calculated with an eye toward the
third person as though there were
insurmountable obstacles to it in the
first person and this gives us a full
impression of how indispensable this
third person is for the completion of
the joking process and I like this
because it I mean obviously evokes the
necessary kind of communicative
enterprise like a joke doesn't exist
successfully without the kind of
exchange and it seems like this kind of
formulation that architecture could
learn a bit from we talked about users
and sometimes to perform post occupancy
surveys or collect data but most often
the hypotheses that drive
design remain untested or unproven they
remain intent one-way communication to
think about a joke is to think about a
conversation back and forth and to kind
of actively consider the pleasure and
entertainment of the person that you're
serving Freud also as we know like to
diagnose and he identified a condition
called the Witsel loosed an obsessive
wordplay in my exhibition Parana media
have similarly pathologized the drive to
play Parana media is the rhetorical term
for punting so apparent amines the act
is a person who is kind of addicted to
honey in an attempt to address the first
person both within comedy and within the
residential environment Keller
Easterling takes on the challenge from
the architect when she proposes that
rather than conceiving of the architect
as an optimizer or an organizer a better
role model might be a comedian
someone who rolls with punches and keeps
things moving in a short contemplation
on money and comedy she provides further
support for the discipline suitability
for comedic participation saying
architects typically love manners
utopia's and crises we love to make
difficult questions harder
we love to train ourselves to do
labor-intensive tasks we are very well
prepared to juggle complex organization
and problems that involve correlative
thinking correlative thinking so in the
spirit if not performance of a comedian
I present to you the results of a
variety of labor-intensive tasks related
to what I found in a year of reading
about and thinking on humor as it
relates to architecture
when I began this research I cast a wide
net looking for all sorts of takes on
how humor and comedy operator thinking
that perhaps there's some kind of
cognitive science explanation for the
things that make us laugh in addition to
all the social science explanations that
were or at least I had started to become
a little bit familiar with the puns
because of the simplicity of the
structure turned out to be something
about which a lot of disciplines have
something to say translators are rightly
curious about questions surrounding
second and third meanings and statements
and original languages and the
importance or even possibility of
properly mapping them into new forms but
what I was surprised to find was that
there's a serious amount of overlap
between linguists and computer
scientists in regard to puns when it
comes to artificial intelligence there's
a field called cognitive linguistics
it's kind of a hybrid of the two
where can linguists are trying to figure
out how to help computer scientists
develop programs to help computers talk
naturally researcher Reath
researchers are focused on natural
language generation finding ways to make
computers communicate effectively like
humor humans something I particularly
liked and found very humorous was the
number of acronyms and in particular
punning acronyms related to cognitive
linguistics there are three early pun
generation programs and I won't go too
far into what exactly they do but one is
jape which is joke analysis and
production engine from 1996 the HCC pH
cpp generator
homonym common phrase puns from 1999 why
is crack witty
idiomatic sentence creation revealing
ambiguity and context from 2002 and
standup system to augment non-speakers
dialogue using puns program so I
appreciate like all of the levels of
what those scientists are trying to do
in naming they're like very kind of
creation of humor programs pictured here
I think I think it's pervert there are a
couple different avatars but there's a
lot of research into like how to make
computers more friendly and mentioning
the kind of Bergson formulation of
humans acting like machines or machines
like acting like humans now an
interesting output from a couple of
German experiments related to Herbert
and a couple of his cohort was that so
they were testing whether a joke
generation program actually worked and
so they would test the avatars saying
just a plain statement and then the
avatar is saying something that was
funny and so first they had to determine
what is funny which is a whole other
study that they had to like do surveys
and find funny things and then they put
the not funny avatars and the funny
avatars out into the experimental world
and people found the not funny avatars
just as funny because their avatars so I
think we're probably getting to a point
where we'll become more familiar with
avatars and AI
unless just strange in general but I
like the idea that the human acting like
the machine is funny but also the
machine acting like the human is funny
so for what that's worth there's like a
tremendous amount of so there's when you
study film as I did undergrad people
often say like oh you're never going to
enjoy watching a movie again which is
kind of true because you like break it
down you learn about shots things become
a little too formulaic it seems that way
with humor as well so they're like
countless diagrams and they just pulled
a few of them talking about like how to
tell a joke and how jokes work and what
a canned joke is versus a spontaneous
joke which is the preferred of the two
like situation problem response like
there are a lot of like very complex
flowcharts that explain the processes
that we ostensibly engage in everyday so
context it turns out is kind of
essential to the pun because you only
know what the first meaning of a pun is
by it not matching the context or the
assumptions that you make and so context
came up as an early
investigation thinking about what it
would mean to not just swap out meaning
in a sentence but to swap out an object
or swap out kind of an element in a
design and kind of by accident but also
because I I think it was in Chicago we
went to see there's a William Morris
exhibition Oh Cleveland and saw and got
pretty excited by the kind of repetitive
forms that were showing up and these
William Morris patterns it started
thinking about what does it mean to
identify you know one object and swap it
out for another and where's the
threshold for how many swaps you can
make before something becomes something
entirely other and at that time early
kind of this year James and I had been
talking about what it means to be super
popular on the internet related to
architecture but also just in general
like what is the influence of social
media on culture and so I got interested
in what what is super popular on the
internet and
kind of pulling greatest hits from
various sites here we're looking at I
think it's cults 3d so we looked at a
bunch of different free 3d model
download warehouses and culled the top
ten most popular objects to download and
then just kind of mechanically in a
grasshopper script swapping them out for
the different elements in that original
william lawrence pattern so what you see
in the middle is the number one and then
as they get smaller you go down to
number ten
so cults 3d has a lot of French stuff in
general the Eiffel Tower shows up a lot
and then other things like toilet show
up I think this is a grab CAD and I love
the idea that you might almost not
notice so maybe some of you have seen
the wallpapers that have been up kind of
covering the windows as we install the
show this past couple weeks I love the
idea that you might not notice what's
going on inside of the pattern and that
it could have a press
it's just a pattern as just a texture in
your ordinary life or what this is
Google 3d which is a little terrifying
and that's a CNC that you can print
yourself that doesn't work in second
place and then finally this is pin shape
and that's some of you have noticed and
come up to me it talked about it and
James and I are both wearing the pattern
tonight but you have I don't know what
the actual names of the characters are
but they're pokemons I think in the
center and a couple other kind of
mechanical elements that it's clear
people who just want a 3d print
something download like a little Vaz I
think it's like four inches tall this
this one right here and can have that
pretty quickly so that kind of ambiently
becomes part of the scenery and I am
interested in that but I don't know that
it kind of adequately addresses the
nature of the pun so there's more
thinking about jokes and humor also
a kind of deep connection to tricks so
especially in my studio this semester
we've been talking about like what does
it mean to tell a joke that's funny for
everyone versus telling a joke where
somebody's the butt of the joke or
telling the joke where somebody's kind
of left out
and similarly tricks are kind of operate
as this weird space in between actual
humor and kind of messing with your
perception and figuring out what and
where you find things funny so this
these two illustrations are claimed in
this kind of a mind that can sustain
humor in this cognitive science book as
kind of your eyes know what's happening
but you continue to find joy and
pleasure in not being like I see a lot
of you kind of like squinting and being
like kind of cool looking
at the elephant whose legs are in the
wrong place and it continues to confound
because your eyes continue to work in
the same way whereas with a joke you
hear the punch line and then it's not
funny again so this has a different kind
of operation which was exciting
so illusion came to mean something that
could kind of embrace perception and
then maybe also take a kind of backdoor
to producing some of the humerus or
comedic effects so what you're looking
at is a Rubens Baz and I just but I
typed in allusion to Google and was
looking at all these different kind of
things there's a dinosaur that you can
like turn and its eyes follow you and
there's all sorts of ones but what I
liked about this was well pretty clearly
the figure-ground relationship that's
something that we as architects study
and are familiar with and think about
all the time so by playing with the
reversal of figure and ground so kind of
explicitly like is it two faces is it a
Vaz you can kind of embrace the illusion
but also embrace playing with your eyes
and simultaneously I have one of my
favorite artists Nina katchadourian who
is a professor of mine in undergrad
has this series that I saw in her
exhibition at the Blanton Museum in
Austin last year called I think they're
I think the official title is bathroom
portraits in the Flemish style the story
behind it is that she was like traveling
to Korea for a exhibition and she had
promised them work and she hadn't done
it and so she was like well I'm on this
plane for like 12 hours what can I do so
using the materials available in the
airplane bathroom and taking advantage
of the fact that many of her co
travelers were asleep she staged like
elaborate photo sessions and she has
like a lot of these and she's done them
in planes all over the world and they're
brilliant and I had a postcard of this
next to my desk and I just really liked
her use of scarves and plastic bags
sometimes and so this is a distinct
profile and I thought well that's an
opportunity to kind of see what I can do
with the Rubens Vaz and if it produces
any effects that are different from what
I expect
so I made a quick revolve in Rhino
nothing too complicated it's literally
just you know a trace of her profile and
that was it like it's really not hyper
designed I would say she designed it and
decided to kind of see see how far I
could take the Rubens vod's as complete
with the simplicity of it and also
embracing what I saw as the
architectural spec so the specification
like this is a really simple spec I have
a profile and a 360 revolve period but
what does it mean to bring that idea
into reality in multiple mediums is far
mark more complicated as I learn it very
quickly and pretty exciting and that's
where I think the kind of Keller
Easterling architects as comedians
embracing the ridiculousness of you know
totally futile challenges just for the
fun of it comes into play because the
first boss that you'll see I think we
were estimating yesterday it's gotta
have had at least a hundred hours in the
mill in the five
most of them downtime for various
reasons but like any reasonable person
would have stopped after like six hours
but we did not so with many great
resources at my disposal thanks to the
Lefevre fellowship I began to
investigate how many ways I might
fulfill the spec proposed by the Reubens
Val's illusion and tonight you'll see
six efforts in the gallery each of them
subject to and scarred by its own
traumas of production so none of them is
perfect they're really very imperfect
each of them is very distinct in the
tools and methods of their fabrications
and three examples best show how
differently design intent can be
rendered in reality so the 3d print I
think I didn't even show a picture
because it's a 3d print it seems super
straightforward in the process at least
for me it was by far the easiest it
seemed really expensive at the time but
if you account for the amount of time we
spent like babysitting the mill or
preparing additional files for
fabricators it was by far the least
expensive through contact at the idea
foundry here in Columbus I was able to
work with I see 3d a large-scale 3d
printing company to produce a version of
the Vaz I sent them a file a week later
they told me there were problems
with the thickness I adjusted sent them
another file and then like three weeks
later they said it was ready and they
went and picked it up you'll see in the
gallery that there are problems with the
print because it is gigantic and even a
gigantic 3d printer can't print
perfectly all the time so there's
problems with the lip problems with the
edges problems with the scaffolding
material so the way they're displayed in
the gallery most of the causes are
filled with plastic ferns but if you do
go investigating and I don't encourage
you to you'll see that the 3d printed
Vaz is filled with scaffolding material
because the the neck or rather the tip
of the nose of the Vaz is too narrow to
get any of the scaffold material out so
each one of these even the kind of
perfect easy one is not quite great so
the stacked plywood seemed like a easy
version that we could knock out pretty
quickly it's actually the one we
finished up late yesterday and it
encountered a variety of exciting
problems that I won't go into too much
detail with but you should take a look
at it in the gallery because it bears so
many marks of just things that go wrong
in the mill and I find those traces to
be the most exciting thing about it
when it came out really smooth yesterday
I was almost disappointed by the kind of
perfection on some of the side most
exciting for me was something I had
never done before which was worked with
glass blowers so we cast a wide net we
found as many different fabricators and
craftspeople as we could find and as
many media as we could find and one of
the people who responded many many
people did not respond one of the people
who responded was Nate with judo who I
don't think it's here but he kind of
heroically took on the challenge of this
enormous Boz and I didn't realize how
small glassblowing projects normally are
and what we proposed was like I think
it's 16 inches in diameter and 18 inches
tall so quite a hefty Boz and so he told
me I don't have time to make a plaster
cast for it and I need the plaster cast
in order to do it thinking that I would
not do that but of course I went back to
the shop and
with Mike and everybody in the shop and
James produced this tremendous 250 pound
plaster cast which you see here what you
see broken on the sides is a foam
positive so we meld two foam half
positives of the buzz covered them with
like eight coats of primer and then
inside of a wooden box poured 250 pounds
of plaster waited for it to dry and then
it was very very difficult to remove the
the foam positive Ryan here helped me
out quite a bit it took a long time it
was triumphant when it finally worked
and then we made a couple of attempts at
creating the vod's when I say we I mean
the guys at the glass lab because I sat
to the side and took a lot of pictures
but what you see here is from this
Wednesday night and this is a tremendous
sized ball of molten glass that
coming of us that you'll see in the
gallery and I didn't want to show a
picture because I think it actually
looks best right now
and it hasn't looked as good before so
check that out one of the amazing things
about that was just like I would never
have imagined that I had access to the
resources of glassblowers but I was met
at every turn with them by total
enthusiasm they were like who are you we
were affiliated to OSU great let's do
this and I'm pretty sure they would have
done that even if I wasn't and it was
just really incredible it took like 12
people to make this thing and they all
had this incredible choreography and
teamwork and it's awesome to be reminded
of that because our teamwork looks a
little bit different repetition that's
another thing
comes up in company and one of my
students is talking about comedy and her
project this semester as like everything
extra like everything is just kind of
turned up to 11 which I love and so
comedy is a kind of excess something in
addition to communication maybe an
ornament something that's not strictly
necessary so we often forget how
important it is so anyone who has a bit
of familiarity with knock-knock jokes
and I know Todd does and knows that it
only works if you know how to play the
game the necessary repetition of the
setup lets you know what to expect and
when conventions and expectations are
broken to me the souvenir and I'm
showing Madeline's reasoned ohrp's kind
of part of a collection of souvenirs and
mementos that she's collected over her
lifetime to me the repetition of the
knock-knock joke the repetition of the
joke that isn't funny except in the
context of the like million other jokes
like it
I think of yo mama jokes in this vein
like it's not that funny to say it once
but you know when you're trading barbs
as it were it becomes a funny exchange
and
the necessary repetition of the setup in
the souvenir means that you know what
you want to get from it so we're looking
at a lot of different buildings but also
little dolls and trinkets that she has
and it's something that occurs again and
again and exists to bring about a
certain set of memories
Susan Stewart wrote this really
incredible book called on longing that
I've been returning to since I was an
undergrad and it continues to delight me
as much as it did the first time but she
writes a lot about memory and miniatures
and the role of kind of encasing worlds
in finitude and I think I talked about
this later I do but she talks about like
the the dollhouse as a
productive construct because it ends at
the doll house like there's no confusion
about where skills mismatch
nobody's going into or out of the doll
house they just stay in that world so
memory is an important part of humor and
one that I think is really interesting
especially as it relates culturally and
through time so it's certain jokes
especially if you go to the OSU library
and try to take out a joke book as they
get older they get much less funny
and also like much more inappropriate
and like the the whole notion of kind of
comedy changing over time is very
effectively shown through looking at
jokes from different times thinking
about architecture the excess of humor
has an analogue in the excesses of
collecting both objects and memories and
what we collect has a lot of impact
literally on our surroundings not only
can you imagine that her studio is just
filled with stuff but you can also
imagine that that stuff is then
informing her everyday experience yeah
so collecting is another kind of
hoarding another kind of
memories and souvenirs and
while I was initially thinking about
souvenir buildings as constrained
specifically so I went out looking for
souvenir buildings I went to the antique
malls and thrift stores of Columbus
thinking about what it meant much like
we did for unfair use what it meant to
have a kind of fetish object to refer to
both as kind of precedent reference and
also as this kind of strange piece or
memory of the building that it
references and I started to learn about
the souvenir bank building which is not
something I was familiar with it all
before it's something that was often
given as a promotion by a bank when a
new client opened up a savings account
the bank both portrayed the actual so
these are all examples of that type the
souvenir Bank both portrayed the actual
banks the client patronized as well as
serving as an actual piggy bank for
saving up change to deposit in its
larger version so like you put change in
to the tiny bank and then you bring the
tiny Bank to the large bank and take the
change out and there's a kind of weird
doubling of that relationship so rather
than the vector out from a landmark
building like the Empire State Building
or the Eiffel Tower and the souvenir
Bank recalls it's remember again and
- itself so it has very strong tractor
views so when thinking about the idea of
repetition and the way the knock-knock
joke effectively creates a framework of
expectation and surprise I began to work
with making copies of my own and
abstracting the fiction that is the one
of a kind but mass-produced souvenir in
the gallery we'll find a feast of
buildings both famous and Bank ranches
alongside fruit and vegetables all
abstracted
and unified by both their repetition and
their homogeneous material I used
plaster to cast these objects not only
because it is great for retaining a lot
of the detail that I really wasn't aware
was present in fruit skins but also to
kind of recall the plaster casting of
Architects of yore
so I've amassed a collection of plaster
casts of all the stuff that's around us
there's not a pediment in sight but
there is kind of a sea of
undifferentiated objects that I would
argue makes them kind of clash or come
into conversations they might not
otherwise have
which brings us to narrative so
collecting and thinking about the
collector narrative is a way of
accessing the third person that Freud
mentioned but I don't want to discount
discount in the role
excuse me I don't want to discount the
role of narrative in producing new or
alternative architectures something that
comedy and especially the techniques of
improvisation can show us Susan Stewart
again addresses the questions of the
miniature as a notion of creating a
complete world the dollhouse is
fascinating and useful to those who play
with it because it presents a closed
unit a finite universe that closes down
the possibility of its own
contradictions entirely by its play with
scale I attempted a reversal of this
process by photographing em I put this
in their own place but this is a picture
of the Collier brother's apartment to me
the flipside of collecting I attempted a
reversal of this process by
photographing both the models souvenir
buildings that I collected as well as my
own personal collection of scale figures
and playing with their relative sizes to
render them in new worlds attempting to
break them out of their finite universes
to play with one another the
attempt or the intent was to reassemble
the world suggested by but lost in the
miniatures and figurines I've collected
to enact the opposite of displacement
and find them squarely within new
environments that might suggest or lead
to new ideas of place through all these
investigations I've tried to address the
question of humor with what I think of
as a sort of F F and E approach and that
excuse me that is furniture fixtures and
equipment the things that when looking
at project budgets on client projects I
was always amazed and aghast that they
were taking up like the largest
line-item and that I got to see them
like maybe in the photos and to touch
the process of specifying
FF&E only sometimes so the things that
also humans touch and experience within
built architecture so much like comedy
you might think of ffs in the elements
as an add-on something that's extra but
not serious enough for architects to
delve into but I would argue that the
opposite is true and that it's very
important that we concern ourselves with
designing the things that fill the
spaces as much as the spaces themselves
the architectural exhibition itself has
long been in my crosshairs as a place
containing a lot of productive
dissonance and latent contradiction and
architectural exhibition is everything
but architecture so it was my intent
with Parana maniac to create an
environment that's just ever so slightly
off from something real where it's not
quite obvious with the status of the
model is or if there is a model at all
and where it feels like we might have
become estranged from our own scale it
presents an exaggerated environment a
place where metaphors mix and aren't
entirely clear and where references are
not directly or easily mapped onto one
reference using the techniques of comedy
and improvisation I've attempted to use
the tools at hand in the architectural
exhibition as a productive contrivance
something able to speak beyond its space
but is also very much rooted in its
location
and I hope that you will come see the
exhibition
[Music]
[Applause]
