well good evening welcome to the
Knowlton school and to the Baumer
lecture series this is our first lecture
of spring 2020 and we have with us
tonight professor Amy glass Meyer who
comes to us from MIT the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology where she is a
professor at both economic geography and
urban planning dr. glass Meyer is an
exceedingly a well respected and
established member of our community in
urban planning she is actually the
author of many books and she has founded
the she's one of the founding editors of
the Journal of the Cambridge Journal of
c.j our region's economies and society
which is actually one of the most
remarkable journals in our field because
in under ten years it is managed to
establish itself with an impact factor
that exceeds many of our older journals
in the field so it's quite an
accomplishment at MIT
Amy runs the regional innovation and
spatial analysis lab and that is in part
because her research is very much
engaged with policy and with planning
practice what one of the things that
some of you may be familiar with is
Amy's work developing the living wage
calculator which is a tool that is
available on the MIT website is often
covered by and used by people from like
the New York Times but also people in
planning practice to determine whether
or not the living wage that's calculated
for a given region is in fact
representative of the economic
circumstances in that region as opposed
to using a national measure at the local
level so Amy's work focuses a lot on
economic Africa opportunities and
distributional equity questions
she herself earned her PhD from the
University of California Berkeley and is
a member of an exceptional cohort of
scholars who emerged from Berkeley's
graduate programs in urban planning and
geography and since has defined the
field of industrial job
in the US for at least two generations
she is also a fellow of the American
Association of geographers she's
currently working on a project called
goodbye to the American dream which
sounds like we may learn a little bit
more about tonight and I've won it
especially a highlight for you how much
I am personally honored to have her here
today she has been a mentor to me and a
mentor to many of us here and it is
always wonderful to have colleagues who
as support
all of us and and in addition to doing
exceptional work so please join me in
welcoming professor Amy Glassman
[Applause]
Thank You Jennifer for that lovely
introduction I'm really happy to be here
for a number of different reasons one is
because I was very excited when I knew
Jennifer was moving here she is a really
important person in the domains that we
work in and we shared very closely a
friend so we've got a lot of overlapping
connections but also I was born in
Detroit and as a child I lived in
Cincinnati and my dad lived in
Cincinnati until he moved west to
California so there's some sense to me
that that in trying to put my talk
together that I was trying to figure out
a place I'd been but I hadn't been there
since a you know so long ago I'm not
going to tell you because then it will
tell you exactly how old I am but it
didn't make me reflect on the world that
I left when I was a child because I
brought my dad back in the early 2000s
and we drove around and aside from
finding a million glass Meyers are
actually a lot of glass Myers in Ohio
they arrived here as farmers and so we
even went out and met somebody we didn't
we knew they had the same name and same
spelling they didn't know who we were we
found out we were cousins deeply you
know Rudy
but the reason that I felt particularly
interested in investigating Ohio as a
part of the talk that I'm going to give
is because when I left it was this
amazing powerhouse just like when I left
Detroit it was this amazing powerhouse
and and so trying to figure out how it
fits into the world today and what
happened in the intervening decades was
some really a personal interest of mine
and so that's what I'm going to talk
about but I'm gonna start out at a
certain scale and then I'm gonna zoom in
to Ohio so this is a headline that was
from the New York Times this last week
written by Nick Kristof and his wife and
it's a story about his return on a
regular basis to the town he grew up in
which was a sheep farm and he lived on a
sheep farm Patel was in Oregon so it was
a rural area and what he's done over the
course of many decades is to go back in
to check in with his friends that he
went to high school with and the article
is about what happened to some of the
most well positioned people in his
community when he was growing up and the
story is a bleak story it's a story of
sort of free fall in one case an entire
family and it we have to ask how does
that happen and why does that happen
where it happens and what do we have in
the way of opportunities to change that
fate and so that's what I'm gonna talk
about I'm going to talk about where we
are today
how we got to where we are and then talk
a little bit about Ohio and then talk
about what we as citizens and as
academics and as political leaders and
industrialists what we can do to
essentially rewrite the ship that we
currently are riding on now it's not the
case in mine so I teach in the School of
Architecture and planning I spent 20
years in geography as an economics
prefer and then went back to planning
and so it's a very interesting sort of
juxtaposition geographers think about
and try to explain the problem and
planners want to do something about that
problem and in a lot of cases we don't
kind of meld together but I think that
by putting planning and geography and
the built environment fields together
with a field like geography and really
the the landform
oriented fields that we have a lot to
contribute in trying to figure out this
kind of crazy world we live in I want to
start by going back in time to a time
when the United States was really
interested in the renovation of itself
where we formulated policy that was to
lead to a future that we all were
seemingly on board with I then I'm gonna
step forward in time and talk about
today and try to bring those two things
together and then finally I'm going to
talk about what I think we can do as we
move forward in time because we're at a
moment of of great reflection and
transformation and we all have an
opportunity to do something about the
world we live in so about 20 years ago I
wrote a I made a Atlas of poverty in the
United States and I could see from the
very moment I was looking at the 2010
census and I could see that there was
this really remarkable split that was
forming in the country and it wasn't
just a geographic split it was a
sociological split in terms of the
opportunities that people had or didn't
have and I would didn't anticipate that
by using the term one nation falling
apart that that would become a little
catchphrase today because I sort of
figured we'd figured the problem out and
we wouldn't keep going in the direction
we did but so far we haven't actually
changed our path but to begin with it
America
was a country where at different moments
in time we've all been very similar and
as time has passed we've become
significantly more different we've
become different in income and education
and opportunities this is a slide that
show and and I'm going to start with the
history of poverty United States so you
can see where we've gone over the last
50 years and see how remarkable our
transformation has been which should be
an indication of exactly how much we can
change that were not a static society
that were a sight a society that has
dynamics and that we need to marshal
those dynamics for the good so this is a
table that shows you the poverty levels
from 1959 in 1969 this is the
essentially three time periods over
which the United States developed
significant national policy to bring
people up and also to expand out the
resources and the benefits that we had
at the time in 59 the poverty rate was
22% and by 1968 it went down to 12% and
then in 1970 or so it basically topped
off at about 12% of the population and
then it's risen over time but this was
the statistics that John Kennedy saw
when he went into the the the hollers of
Appalachia and mounted first to campaign
to be the presidential candidate and
then subsequently went back to
Appalachia in the nineteen nineteen
sixties during this the presidential
election and as he says in his memoirs
the the relationship that he developed
with West Virginia was critical and his
ability to become the president of the
United States because among other things
it wasn't just that he won West Virginia
it was because it gave him a kind of
empathy that he had not had before as a
Brahmin from Boston where he wanted for
nothing
so keep these statistics in mind here is
the
picture of who was poor at that time and
what what how poverty changed for
different groups over time and what you
see is of course this very dramatic
difference between people of color and
and and white people and males and
females and and so you can see a pattern
which actually has been persistent which
is men have always been less poor white
women next african-american men next and
then African American women and this
distribution is still holds today but
you can also see that there was a
downward trajectory for everyone and
there are some of these sort of you know
big moments that shifting in in the
lines and that's actually as a result of
changes in poverty piles changes in
policy that actually had significant
impact on groups of individuals in
society this is where poverty population
was located within the south and the
South has seen the largest decrease in
population our poverty population in the
country and but it still today has a
very high rate of poverty relative to
the rest of the country pop so what are
the really interesting questions is you
saw the picture of poverty in the 50s
and then the 60s and you see that when
we get to the end of the 60s that
there's this big drop in poverty right
and the question is why and and the
answer is because we had national
policies that provided support resources
that made it possible for people who had
been economically insecure to develop a
level of Economic Security that had
before evaded them this is the modern
safety net list here and this most of
these policies came into existence in
that decade the decade of 1960 to 19
the witch put us floor underneath poor
populations in the United States we had
food stamps we ended up with community
health centers those were incredibly
important there were communities all
over the country with rural populations
or in deep urban populations that had no
access to health care whatsoever they
did not have access to preschool they
did not have access to health care so
over this sweep of many at some of these
policies started in the 50 40s and 50s
but the majority of them came out in the
60s and some of the 70s and so we have
this dramatic arc of programs which were
focused specifically on individuals now
on on the at the same time as we were
focusing policies on people we also had
a very large set of programs on places
so we had the area redevelopment
administration which its first budget
was 900 million dollars in 1963 900
million dollars in 1963 is eight point
seven billion dollars today couldn't
imagine putting that kind of money in a
public program today
and and the amount that was actually
allocated to people was was about two
billion dollars but that was spread over
a period of time so what the end so it's
it's interesting to just ponder that
when we put policies in that focused on
people the things that people needed the
very basic goods clean water access to
schools access to health care access to
transportation access to community
capacity those factors helped to bring
poverty populations down dramatically
the 1970s so that so I would argue that
the statistics bear out that we actually
know how to solve problems like poverty
it's not rocket science there are deep
socio
issues that have to be solved but in
general giving people access to the
basics that they need give them a sense
of security and give them a sense of
identity and value that allows them to
to actually live their life in relative
security so what happened how did we get
to where we are today
this is a famous refrain that Ronald
Reagan came up with in which he
basically said Ronald Reagan was deeply
opposed to everybody beyond Johnson was
pretty much opposed to large-scale
social welfare programs and the reason
that they were opposed to them was a
couple of things first off the economy
became increasingly unstable you had the
oil crisis and there starting in the
early 1970s which created a day it's an
inflationary spiral that was out of
control
you had increasing international
competition which previously we had sort
of essentially evaded partly because we
were helping to rebuild countries but
also because we were active policy
actors in trade restraints from the
beginning of the twentieth century and
we ramped them up in the 1960s and 70s
to try to protect some of our labor
intensive industries another factor that
was really important is that some of our
key industries had not been and had not
had their capital refreshed so they were
basically operating making products
using machines that were not the state
of the state of the art and and our
competition was was beating us simply on
the basis of the fact that they were
using new capabilities so we were losing
our position which of course if your
president and your economy begins to
fall apart you start to look around as
of and find ways to reduce the costs
that you have in order to balance your
your bud
that's an objective that you have so
Ronald Reagan being a fiscal
conservative basically said looking at
the criticisms sort of built up over the
70s and into the early 80s and when
those criticisms unfolded they were
primarily against the bureaucracy and
the state the argument was government
shouldn't be involved in the economy
government wastes money there was a lot
of stories you've heard the language and
the bottom line was that was easy to
roll into a conclusion that we need to
cut these programs or we need to stop
spending money on these types of issues
and so when Ronald Reagan said we fought
a war on poverty and poverty one that
essentially unloosened the sense of the
but of the public that there was
something that we could do to change the
fate of people who lived in
circumstances that were less than they
had what also happened to say all of
this it's like this giant salad bowl
right there's all these things whirling
around and and pieces are being pitched
out and and things are not gelling
anymore this data tells us that not only
did we have problems starting in the
1970s we actually started to have
problems earlier than that which was in
the in the 1960s when we started to see
that income inequality was rising and
the incoming quality we think of income
inequality as something new people talk
about it as if it started in the 1980s
didn't start in the 1980s it started
back in the 1950s there was a low it
took it took back up in the 1960s and
the reason is because globalization was
much earlier than people tend to think
of it as coming into play we were we
were as interested in international
development as we were domestic
development and there's lots of
references and Kennedy's writings to the
fact that we need to bring back home the
money we're spending abroad because we
have people here that we need to educate
and we have factories that we need to
rebuild so there was already an Under
standing that that our approach to the
world and going outside would have
consequences domestically but this is
just to show you that you know mostly
when you see a graph when people are
looking at inequality statistics they
don't show you that it starts out and
you can see it from 1966 on and it but
if I had later dit or earlier data I
could show it started in the 50s and
what does that mean that means that you
can see people at the bottom were
basically not experiencing any change in
their income to speak up now if you take
how many decades forward that particular
condition has existed and you ask the
question if you lived through that with
that type of an income structure your
whole life what would you feel like you
would feel incredibly insecure you would
feel like there was nothing forward for
you because for three or four decades it
doesn't look like anything has come to
pass this is a map of poverty in the
United States and 20 2017 and and what
this map shows you is that the picture
doesn't look a lot different so we still
have clusters of deep poverty in this
country this is so mixed but the poorest
place in the country remains it has
always been
reporter Indian labs natural resource
regions places which had strong
resource-based economy's that basically
collapsed as a result of technological
change international competition and a
failure to make investments to stay up
with industrial change so that's the
picture of where we that's that's just a
background for where I want to take us
and now I want to take us through what
is it that's happening and why are
people feeling is anxious as they are
and I want you to think about how you
would flip around the factors that I'm
describing and think of solutions to the
conditions that I'm examining so the
first thing to say is that over the
course of the last 40 years our our jobs
structure has changed and it has become
increasingly bifurcated with high and
low wage employment and that has been
accompanied that accompanies the
emphasis of industries as they evolve
technologically from one level of
sophistication to another and what we
find ourselves with today is a workforce
that has a high level of contingency
that means that it's not a permanent job
it's a job that you can have for three
or four days or four or five weeks and
then you find another job but we also
have an industrial structure that has a
workforce characteristic that is high
touch but relatively modest skilled and
if you have a high top that's moving
away and you've got this big bulk of
employment of people that are taking
care of one another you're going to have
income inequality and you're going to
have a sort of persistent line across
the kinds of jobs that exist now some
people would say that that part of the
problems that Americans are lazy that
they don't they're not interested in
working and I think this graph shows the
fact that that's not true the in fact by
internationals to
people in the United States work harder
than most people in Europe we worked
more hours we take fewer vacations and
we work more canoe
so the question of whether or not the
problem is associated with the workforce
and its failure to be engaged that is
simply not true by the data that exists
but what's also in addition to having
low wages and high wages we also
basically have had very little change in
wages over time so people are not making
much more than they made 30 or 40 years
ago so the ability to save has not been
possible for many Americans today we
also had and part of the reason that
wages have been static there are
structural reasons for that but there
also are the factor that we have a
minimum wage that is set by a decision
made by the President and no president
wants to raise wages and make it more
expensive for businesses to operate so
you have a situation in which the
minimum wage hasn't changed since 2009
Obama changed it when he when he came in
and that has been the last time it's
changed so what does that mean that
means that people are working the same
number of hours but they're really
effectively not making any more money
and they're and when you have an entry
level that's $7.25 an hour which is not
a livable wage then people if that's how
your entryway is into the workforce then
you have you have a sense that there's
there's no way up it's gonna be a long
time before you get to a wage that you
can actually pay for your bills your
rent your car etc so this is just an
example of what the workforce looks like
in terms of the percentage of
relation that's low-wage work and fifty
three million people were 300 million
people 320 million people and you can
see what share that is of that
population that's a very significant
share and it accords with the types of
jobs that we're generating another
factor that has been important in this
is you not totally unique to us and this
time because in the 1980s we had a
financial crisis that was a housing
driven real estate during crisis and a
bank crisis but in general the financial
crisis the biggest impact for many
people was that they lost access to the
housing market and so that what is what
does a house mean to people a house is
not just a shed over your head it's an
asset and it's asset you can invest in
it's an asset that you can borrow from
it's and asks us you can build off of
and so many people lost their their
personal wealth everything they had
stored up in their houses during the
financial crisis why was that
particularly important at that moment
the reason that that was particularly
important is people poured money into
the housing market because there was
that interest rates were very low that
meant when you were borrowing money or
meant when you were saving money in a
bank account you weren't making very
much money so you were looking for an
investment that would grow more than two
or three percent so there was sort of
this you know kind of complex incentive
to move into real estate because real
estate was booming so it moved people
into real estate often in situations in
which they shouldn't have gotten
involved in it but it but it took all of
their savings with it when it declined
so this is just to show you the
homeownership rate so you know
homeownership in the United States is
incredibly important and what we know
now is that a significant number of
people essentially lost that opportunity
and as the financial crisis passed and
we recovered where do you see the
greatest inflation the greatest
inflation is actual
in the residential sector so people
can't get back in
they don't have savings and they can't
get back in and they are in many cases
becoming increasingly house poor this is
another graph to show you what happened
to the share of real estate held by the
bottom 50% so you can see that it rises
in 96 there's a decline and then an
uptick in 2008-2009 and then then a
decline again and it's it has not
recovered much since then a third issue
is just the fundamental wage difference
between having an education and having
some level of skill and competency and
having a high school education or less
and that is combined with the fact that
that split tends to have negative
consequences more so for men than for
women we see that overall participation
rates have been falling male labor force
participation in the United States used
to be as you can see up it you know
almost almost 90% and today it's now
down you know below 80 80 it's it's
about 75% and what why that has happened
is because there's a there's a
population of males in society that have
levels of education that are lower than
what a decent wage would pay and one of
the the issues is also that women are
going to college at a much higher rate
than males are so over time they are
pulling away from men this just shows
you the wage patterns for men and
white and non-white and what you can see
is men's wages are pretty well flat over
time women's wages are creeping up over
time not white is flat a little bit
creeping up but the point is is that
men's wages have really not changed very
much at all and if if you think about
the nuclear family and the way in which
we're structured the idea that men as a
part of a social unit are having a hard
time finding jobs that pay them income
that allows them to contribute
sufficiently to the household it's a
serious problem and then here's another
example of what it looks like when you
have differences in levels of education
and labor force participation rates so
the male labor force participation
decline is associated with levels of
education that the individual has when I
mentioned the the role that education
plays you can see what this means and
you can see the unemployment rates
decrease as you decrease the levels of
education and simultaneously the levels
of income decrease in the same order and
so with less education you you you know
this is a weekly earning you can do the
math to figure out how much somebody
who's making five dollars and five
hundred and thirty three dollars a week
is going to accumulate over the course
of a year that's not a living wage
that's not going to be able to cover
most people's costs so what has been the
net result of all of this movement and
all of these processes growing
inequality to a level today that is now
just surpassed the level of inequality
that existed just before the Depression
and what we can see is that income games
have been at the very top end of the
income distribution and that the bottom
20 percentile incomes have been changing
very little over time now think of it
from your own life experience your costs
are rising all the time so you expect
that at the very least what you need in
order to just make ends meet is that you
are having income increases and and
wealth increases that match with the
kind of basic goods that you need in
this instance people at the low end are
of the income distribution are really
struggling and this is giving you a
sense of what's happened even for the
middle-income households that's probably
the largest concern that we see in the
statistics and in the narratives that
are being written about what people feel
today and why they are feeling both
disparage but also they feel discouraged
is because from the standpoint of being
a middle-income person a middle-class
person that's something that everybody
aspires to and the ability to make it
even on a middle income is becoming
increasingly difficult depending upon
where you're at major cities San
Francisco a middle-income household is
is really struggling actually you just
pay their basic bills this is another
derivation of the inequality
can see that over time this is not over
a long period of time but you can see is
that three percent of total income is
going to the lowest quintile and the top
five percent is getting 23% so if you
think about that as equal sized buckets
and then a very small small portion of
the one of the buckets and all this
amount of money is going to that or in
the highest quintile fifty-two percent
you can see just how dramatic change has
been and wealth in weapons so income is
one thing so that's what you get paid
for doing something for someone or for
yourself but another issue that's of
extreme importance is the distribution
of wealth so what is wealth wealth is
accumulated assets it's like a stock and
you have it by your side and when you
need it
you can use it you can shave pieces off
of it and you can use it for purposeful
uses you can buy something you can
borrow with it you can expand your
material world you can pay unexpected
bills you can afford health care these
are things which our wealth is something
which are is really critical for
somebody's advancement because it's not
something that you're dealing with day
to day it's something that is a a bulk
of resources that you can draw on over
the your lifetime and you can see in
this diagram that the net worth held by
the top 1% has grown dramatically over a
very short period of time I mean you
know from 2008 to 2018 you have to ask
didn't didn't wealthy people also lose
money in the financial crisis the answer
is yes they actually lost more money
they lost a significant amount of money
but they had a lot of money to begin
with and they had the ability with all
the assets that they had left to
continue to grow those assets whereas
for a
a working-class person they often lost
all of their assets so they didn't have
anything that they could start to build
from again so the net results there's a
fear of falling just a fear of just
falling through the sky and not knowing
where you're going to end up not knowing
whether your kids will be able to move
out of your basement not knowing whether
you will be able to retire not knowing
whether you're gonna have to take a
part-time job or not people feel a sense
of justifiable uncertainty and fear and
where they really feel the greatest eggs
is really about this notion of
middle-class stone it's a it's a it's
something we all hold dear and almost
take for granted that we're all going to
end up in that general vicinity somehow
but in fact that isn't the case it never
was the case but it is something that
we've believed in so strongly that it
actually motivated us to do a lot of
things like work really hard save money
postpone consumption and things like
that so the it's it's hard the looking
at the middle of classes first off
difficult you have to figure out what is
the middle class and then you have to
figure out how you're going to measure
it so the Pew foundation is an
interesting organization because they
generate a lot of statistics on the
United States and the United States
population and one of them is looking at
the the middle class and so they have
been tracking the middle class since the
early 2000s and and so I'm going to show
you just what they see you know are
people really falling out of the middle
class because the average percentage of
the population in the middle class in in
the 1990s was about 60% so here's what
we see
excuse me 71 in 1971 so this is this is
a table using their characterization of
middle class income
and what you see is that 1971 61% of the
population was in the middle class and
by 2016 we only had 52 percent of the
population that's in the middle class so
that's a very big change over about a 30
year period of time the result of
technological change international
competition failure to invest in capital
investments failure to invest in people
a series of financial shocks that were
very difficult for people to recover
from and the fact that we are
technologically very sophisticated but
increasingly other parts of the world
are catching up with us so our ability
to see that as the the Avenue out of
this problem
is increasingly less unlikely and what
does it do for us as individuals
economic mobility is declining through
time so I there's a almost saying that
that middle class being in the middle
class means that your children will
eventually be able you through the
resources that you have being a middle
class person we'll be able to put your
children into a position so that they
will be able to do better than you do
and that is a thought that we've built
into people that if they do the right
things they work hard they save their
money that there they will be able to
position their children so that that
possibility exists what this graph shows
is that the ability to move income
groups over time has declined over time
dramatically so in the 1940s the
probability that you're going to earn
more money than your parents was very
high as we move down the graph you can
you can see that we get to a point where
by about 1965 less than
50% of the population is going to be
able to make at that given current
circumstances 50% of the population is
not likely to be able to make more money
than their their parents did and if you
think I know I have two children and and
that's a real that's a real issue I mean
that's you when I when I think I live in
Boston right it's an expensive place
high skills high wages my kids both have
a lot of education one's a chemist one's
a data analyst but when I look at their
incomes now and I took and I project
them out based on what I know they will
not make as much money as I have made in
my life and I I just can see that and so
you know I it's like having a
conversation with your kids and they're
going well we would really like to have
a lifestyle like you have Bob and I'm
like well that's great how you gonna do
that and I think that that's also
something that's very difficult for us
as parents and and you know us as
individuals planning our lives what is
it going to look like before we used to
count on this now we can't do that so
what's really at the heart of this when
it's all said and done and all these
things that have caused all these
problems the answer is work doesn't pay
today it really doesn't pay and that's
because the minimum wage that's because
of the kinds of jobs that's because of
the kind of job contracts we have it's
not international competition in
automation those are definitely issues
but those are issues that change supply
they don't change the conditions what
really is the problem is wage rates are
too low and as long as wage rates are
too low people are always going to dis
save to cover their regular expenses and
that's really what we have to fix we
have to fix the amount of money that
people are making
I work in communities and sometimes
people will say to me things like well
you know that person that works in that
janitorial service say they really have
no skills that you know they should only
make seven dollars and twenty-five
dollars
because actually they don't they don't
know how to do anything and I look at
that person I said when I was in high
school I was a janitor and I knew how to
run machinery I knew how to stop various
bad things from happening I knew how to
mix chemicals I knew how to do things I
mean I literally if I didn't know how to
do them I would have blown myself up or
I what a burn somebody's building down
right so that's the same thing do you
know what somebody you know how they
clean these horses days maybe not here
but you know your long floors you know
they clean them with an automated
machine that a person sits in like a
that the device that scrapes off the ice
you can't be a dimwit and drive that it
goes really fast it has to get stuff out
on the ground it has a certain
temperature you have to pick it up at a
certain time you have to make the turns
you have to do all these things have to
load it right you're not an idiot
and yet we are likely to pay somebody
who knows how to do that who also knows
how to unplug it when the soap is too
thick and it various things like that we
think of that person is not having any
skills and so my view is that we totally
under appreciate what people actually
know how to do and that allows us then
to justify the fact that we're gonna pay
them as little as we possibly can but
there's a lot of evidence to suggest if
you pay people more first of all people
are not videos that's the bottom line
they're not being paid enough but if you
pay people more and there's people doing
experiments with that you get even more
outcomes and more positive consequences
so that's really where it's at so how do
we reverse this and how do we in the
built environment fields think about
this right so how many people have a
firm here okay how many people in
business
so most of us are associated with the
University that's universities pay some
people living wages but I can tell you
from my own organization that we don't
pay everyone living wages which is
somewhat ironic given that I we run a
living wage calculator and we get 5000
hits a day from people using the tool
but I won't go into that I know it's
it's always amusing when it turns out
that yet another part of my institution
uses a living wage calculator and then I
ask them this sort of sneaky question
like so do you pay everybody in your
office a living wage and they look like
this
so you know I'm not making a lot of
progress on that but I'm trying so why
we should think about this is the
following you happen to be in an
organization which is fixed it's not
gonna move away it's gonna be here for
the next hundred years and when it comes
to setting wages for people or
supporting community conversations
around livable wages you can participate
in them you can help the dialogue to
evolve and you can also when you're
working on projects make sure that you
pay people as high as you possibly can
and that isn't necessarily how a person
in human resources is kind of configured
there they're there to make sure that
your resources get to the end of your
project but not necessarily to make sure
that that also means that somebody can
make a living wage while they're doing
that so the so I want to show you that
so I'm gonna shift here so what I've
tried to say is at least I know you know
what I started to do because I've been
so filled with angst about the world
I watched superhero shows now
no they always have these really scary
moments in them you know you think
everybody's gonna die and then there's a
happy ending again right so you can sort
of go I used to read the New York Times
back front I can't do it anymore I read
the headlines that I got I want to read
that already that and then I turned on
the arrow I turn on the flash right turn
on Supergirl and then I I just feel
better I mean I exercise a lot more I
mean it's just a great way to resolve
the eggs that you have but kidding aside
it's a different it's just a complex
time so the the issue for us then is
what do we do about it how do we think
about it and and how do we participate
in it so the living wage calculator was
created a long time ago 2003 and it was
a design specifically for looking at
places which had lost their economic
base and what I mean by that is they had
a big factory the factory leaves and
there are many people that had jobs
there they lose their jobs there they
start to freefall their financial
circumstances become uncertain a whole
lot of other very unfortunate things
take place and I was trying to inform
policy makers that that trend we were
seeing was going to happen and ripple
across rural America because I was
working in rural America at the time and
and so we built it to show policymakers
and this is what happens costs are fixed
in the short run they do not change
their sticky as economists say and maybe
over time as fewer and fewer things are
present prices will fall but there's a
there's a real stickiness to the costs
and when you're in a economic crisis and
you have fixed costs that's a problem
you have to figure and figure out what
to do so the tool was designed so that
somebody could figure out what the cost
of living was and what does include
includes housing food child care health
care transportation other necessities
and taxes and all it is is a cost of
living indicator it's just the sum of
all of those things
there's no super fancy math behind it
it's just the summing up and then
looking at the the cost that that
entails and then looking at how much
money you would have to make over the
course of a year to cover your expenses
and it's used by as I said five five to
seven thousand people on a good and on a
good day ten thousand people will use it
a day it is used by all sorts of
different people from companies to
unions to churches to individuals to any
all matters of organ individuals lawyers
that are trying to deal with questions
of alimony and things like that
and and it is it's probably the most
widely used tool of its type in the
country so let's look and I answer
everyone who writes which is you may
there's two kinds of comments I get it's
not possible live on that that's the
number one and then the second one is
thank you so much I know I'm not crazy
so it's a kind of interesting you know
meter of how people feel so let's look
at Ohio so let's let's first off it's
very stable locations like lumbus where
the economy is actually supported by
state revenues federal revenues and
employers but a lot of money flows in
here
pay tuition and then transfers from
state so we call that kind of money
essentially stable money that is not
something that's just gonna disappear
overnight right and so you don't have to
work too hard either to get it because
people all want to come to go to Ohio
State right I they there has a very
strong community in the United States
that would love to come to Ohio State so
guess what you don't have to worry about
them not paying their bills you don't
have to worry about them not buying a
hamburger you don't have to worry about
them not paying their dorm fees now I
know that's not true actually because
students have Pence am i T have a hard
time paying some of their expenses but
my point is you happen to be in this
nice little island where you the money
flows into you rather than you having to
make something in order to get that
money you are making something you're
making smart but you're not the same as
having to work on an assembly line and
make something that somebody's going to
buy from the outside if you think about
oh so where you're a relatively high
cost but you're also a relatively high
income location stable income you don't
have to work too hard to get the money
to come in here so let's think about
another part so that's that's maybe it
would be a place where you could
actually earn a living wage but let's
think about some other place like Gus
Scioto County did I say that right sio2
sigh Olga so anyway okay so so if you
think about where we are we think about
Scioto Scioto do you think it's possible
for people to to live on the wages in
the state minimum wage which is higher
than the national minimum wage you think
not anybody think that there's any place
in Ohio where you can live on the state
minimum wage No well let's just see okay
so with this this I've gotta clean the
graph and on this axis here we have sort
of the large statistics and some luster
Kip statistics and then this is a map
that looks and what we can see here is
that statewide primaries 14.9% then we
have counties
as high as 23.9% we have counties that
have as low as 5.1 percent and what we
can see is that 17% combined poverty
rate for thirty-two counties in
Appalachia
so that's this region right here right
so that the poverty rate in the
Appalachian counties is higher than the
state average eleven counties in that
region have a poverty rate that is 20%
above the 20% in Appalachia the poverty
rate in those 11 counties is 20% or more
five counties in the state have poverty
rates below 6.5% so they're they're
doing well they're in in relatively good
shape and twenty six point three percent
of Ohioans living in Central City metro
areas are poor or below the poverty line
there is the Appalachian Regional
Commission of which part of Ohio is in
it and they have this designation of
distressed at risk transition and
competitive and what we can see is that
there are four distressed counties that
means that they have high unemployment
low income high poverty rates and you
can see that there's also a significant
number of places which are really
struggling within the state so just take
this County as an example can somebody
live on the minimum wage so this is what
we're trying to show here so this is the
poverty wage and the poverty wage is
simply the number of the poverty income
the level of income that a person who is
living in poverty right at the poverty
level and then there's a there's a a
scale that the federal government
produces for one person it's X for two
people it's 2 X 3 X 4 X
and so then what we do is we simply
divide the number of hours in a year
that a person would be working if they
were working full-time and and we
calculate a poverty wage so we take the
number of hours or the number of days in
a year we divide that into the amount of
income that somebody would get if they
were being paid the poverty level and we
figure out that it's six dollars a an
hour for what you would be paid if you
were being paid a poverty wage in terms
of the living wage the living wage is
the sum of the elements divided by 2,060
working hours a year to come up with ten
dollars and twelve cents an hour so the
minimum wage and we have color coding
for the extent to which these different
categories of household types are able
to what what the income is that they
earn as you move through the household
types and what we're looking at is the
extent to which the minimum wage would
cover someone's basic costs and then how
much more they would have to make in
order to cover their basic costs and so
here we see that the living wage is ten
dollars and twelve cents and the poverty
wage if somebody is living in poverty at
$24,000 a year it's actually twelve
thousand eight hundred dollars a year
the the living wage that they would be
is almost twice that right so if this is
what I if I get paid twelve thousand
eight hundred dollars as a single person
from the federal government for a
poverty income that's what my hourly
wage would be what I need to bake for my
living wage to cover my cost is $10 and
twelve cents an hour and so what you can
see over time
that there are and the color coding is
green is low and red is high how much
more you have to make in order to cover
your costs if you were making a poverty
wage so living or poverty wage is at
least two dollars and 50 cents higher
than the minimum wage so where in the
state is the living wage or the poverty
wage at least two point five two dollars
and fifty cents higher than the minimum
wage and what the bottom line is is that
there's very few categories of family
structure in the county where you would
be able to live on the minimum state
minimum wage or the poverty wage and
then here's just more of the same kind
of information in terms of what's the
median household income for these
counties what's the minimum wage and
then what's the amount of income that
would have to be accumulated in addition
to either the the minimum wage or the
poverty wage in order to cover your
costs and the bottom line is that
there's very few places in the state
where that's possible so the low wage
dilemma is not just in Ohio and and to
some extent what I think the the issue
to think about for Ohio is is that you
have areas of the state which are in
difficult economic circumstances and the
economic opportunities that are there
are not likely to be paying living wages
but also the state minimum wage which is
something that we're all glued to is not
able to do that as well so in terms of
the United States almost all Americans
living in counties where the living wage
is higher than the minimum
there's only a this that the essentially
the bottom line is the minimum wage does
not pay enough money for 97% of the
people who live in counties in the
United States that's the bottom line and
then through that you can see that
seventy percent two hundred and twenty
six million 15 percent forty seven
million twelve percent thirty eight
million Americans living in counties
we're living wages is at least two
hundred two dollars and fifty cents it's
higher than the minimum wage that's
seventy percent and then fifteen percent
and then twelve percent so places where
they need to have an additional $15 per
hour to cover their minimum costs
twelve percent of the population live in
places like that whereas 70 percent of
the population lives in places where
they need to make two dollars and fifty
cents more than the minimum wage where
they live so what do we do about this
there there is a significant movement on
the part of places around the country
focused on paying living wages there's
29 states that are passed changes in
their meaning minimum wage law law Ohio
is one and state minimum wages range
from seven dollars and fifty cents an
hour to $11.50 an hour and that is
changing through time and every year we
see more states paying above the minimum
wage and also states that already pay
above the minimum wage building and more
funds into that and it covers the
numbers of places which actually pay
above the minimum wage is becoming
increasingly a larger share of the total
national population cities that have
enacted very aggressive changes in their
minimum wage rates such as Seattle
Chicago
Massachusetts is going to be paying $15
an hour in the next couple of years so
there is a movement for that to take
place and so when people talk about what
can you do the the answer is to really
argue for paying people what they're
worth and thinking that it's not taking
a penny out of your pocket but actually
adding to the benefits of your own
existence as people are able to take
care of their their circumstances and be
able to plan for the future in a
positive way so advocate for higher
minimum wages patronize organizations
that pay living wages I often go into
organizations and ask employees how much
they make
I don't ask it directly I find very kind
of unusual ways to get that information
out but you can also find out who pays
living wages by just looking at wage
rates on things like Glassdoor and
indeed these are sources for jobs
include encourage your employer's to pay
living wages particularly contingent
employees who are not hired on a
permanent basis and who literally have
to put their lives together on a on a
very precarious manner and and in
increasingly local governments for those
of you that might be working with local
governments or have friends in the local
governments local governments have been
really active in working toward paying
living wages and having their
contractors actually pay living wages in
order for and so they essentially
changed the nature of the work
relationship by doing that so that's
what I have to say and thank you very
much
[Applause]
sure it's $15 now now
[Music]
so small businesses and independently
owned businesses are the parts of the
economy that have been very vocal about
the consequences for raising the minimum
wage and also to just change the wage
even if you're not going all the way up
to the minimum wage in some places scale
it in overtime so that the impact is
less and and it's a real issue if
there's no question particularly in the
very high-cost locations I mean for
example the tube my tool is good for
places where it it's their economic base
and changes in such basic things as
childcare expenses or housing expenses
change in line with inflation or two or
three percentage points above it but
anything beyond that and that begins to
be more than a minimum living wage and
and so the more dynamic and economy the
really the more actually the the higher
the wage is over all that drags up the
the costs overall because people are in
situations where they can pay more but
they're also being able to you know
business expenses are going up such as
real estate places like New York are
going to be a tough one and but the date
but the evidence shows the actual
statistical evidence of what do
organizations do and that is that they
they change the way they're doing what
they're doing they also raise their
price now in the city like New York
where there's a very large portion of
its flow that is associated with people
that are high income or they're there
for tourism tourism is is a boon to any
city because people are going to come
there and they're going to eat and drink
regardless of what the prices because
they save the money to come on that trip
but for regular residents and people who
live in
and some of the outer boroughs that that
can be a problem and and but what we do
see is companies investing in trying to
figure out how to be more productive
how do and employees recognizing that
their wages are going up are themselves
actively involved in trying to figure
out how to be more productive
[Music]
so for jobs that are relatively low
skilled ones where we are directly
competitive with another country and
they have lower wages that that is going
to be always a threat there's no way
around that now the option is to retain
the employment here at amok ad
automation also add increasing skilled
capacity because there's ways for
organizations to reorganize what they do
in order to be more effective some
industries will generally migrate away
and that's largely because somebody it's
not just low wages out there you know
it's it's low wages it's tax incentives
its lower cost capital it's protective
markets there's a whole suite of
activities and Orton and factors that
companies can utilize that add to their
decision to move abroad and in those
cases those jobs may or may not be
mobile a lot depends on what proportion
of their business is amiss domestic the
more that the business is domestic the
more expensive it is to ship something
out to buy something in from some other
location if it has some something that
makes it peculiar to the United States
good example cowboy boots
so cowboy boots should not be made in
the United States most shoes are not
made in the United States but most
cowboy boots are made in the United
States and the reason is because the
market for cowboy boots is very
specialized and it's in the United
States and so shipping them abroad isn't
going to get them access to new markets
and markets companies don't just go for
low wages they go for low wages that go
for markets that go for a whole set of
things so an instance is where there is
only low wages as the the determining
factor I would say that we will always
be competitive for
those kind of jobs and then we always
have been a competitive for those kind
of jobs but I don't think that that's a
good reason for saying we shouldn't pay
people living wages people are adding
more to their job the value of what we
put into our job we add more to it than
we're getting paid I mean youyou can see
the statistics you can't live on what
we're paying people so that we have a
choice we either invest in people to
make them productive to the point where
we can pay them a living wage or we have
to think about the consequences of that
as a suit as a citizenry
into labor organizing
series
there's no question I mean I didn't I
didn't reference it but the decline in
the change in wages in the United States
is attributed by most people as partly
the reduction in union organization and
the ability to have a negotiation around
wages that doesn't happen in the same
manner as it did when you had a
representative who who brought to the
table five thousand people and said okay
this is this is what we give you in the
way of productivity and purpose and this
is what we expect in return and there
are examples where union organizing has
been successful in very labor-intensive
sectors so for example the home health
care industry in New York is a good
example where that's very unionized in
Boston a lot of those types of jobs are
actually either unionized or companies
will pay higher wages to keep them from
becoming unionized universities are
another example where we have a lot of
low wage jobs in universities people who
clean the floors people that move things
around and and they also are people who
maintain the physical infrastructure and
and so they tend to be unionized and and
they tend to have more stable wages so
that is I mean like you can see there's
there's a movement now for the
contingent workforce to actually form in
our alliance and an organization there
are thousands and thousands of people
and and actually put forth a policy of
collective organizing so it may be that
it's it's just around the corner
[Music]
actually thinking all things we need to
make the world we live in
[Applause]
