as the head of landscape architecture
the north of school have the distinct
pleasure to introduce tonight's lecture
Dominique Ginji dominique is the 2019
glimpse a distinguished visiting
professor a position established to the
generosity of her band didi Clem sure
each year we invite a landscape
architect to interact with students and
faculty this is a fantastic opportunity
as the flexibility of the professorship
allows us to support faculty research
expand on seminars and studios as well
as hone on a particular topical issue in
the past few years we have had the
chance to work with a broad range of
practitioners some emerging and others
very established these have included
Walter hood the recent MacArthur Genius
grant recipient from Berkeley
I'm from Boston and Shannon Lee birth
rate from GGN in Seattle we have also
invited landscape
graphically and in doing so having live
of students on different forms of
practice a few years ago we had Michelle
Harris and draw an inch from Lisbon this
year we have the pleasure of welcoming
Dominic eg from the religious studied
biology biology before pursuing a
master's in the landscape architecture
program established by Christopher Shiro
at the 8th AHA in Zurich
she has brought her dual background of
scientist and designer to every project
since then in the early 2000s she were
Swiss landscape architect but who most
most notably on the recreation of a
fracture fragment of the masoala rain
forests of Madagascar in the Zurich Zoo
she subsequently collaborated with fakt
other designers historians and
scientists I'm really trying to keep my
concentration here but it's really hard
on the book tree nurseries cultivating
the urban jungle I discovered the book
several years ago in a bookstore in
Basel and was painstakingly trying to
figure out the German which I have my
level of German is very very bad when I
found out from Dominique that the book
all along had been in English which was
an embarrassing moment number 452 tree
nurseries cultivating the arable jungle
cuts across the themes of climate change
memory colonialism poetics and greed to
offer a very compelling account of the
history and recent developments of the
production of trees from the English
plant hunters in the 1800's to the
contemporary craze for large trees a
status symbol in China the book draws on
scientific research maps tree migrations
and examines the cultural landscape of
nursery hotspots such as Bosca in the
Netherlands and pistola in Italy
finally it offers a structure for this
year's claim Shore landscape seminar
focusing on the link seldom acknowledged
between tree production plant research
and landscape practice
Dominic edges design practice
straddles scientific pragmatism and art
in 2009 she founded the firm Anton
DG landschaft architecture with the
Catalonian architect and last year
launched her own studio get cheap asaji
whose title brings to the fore her
Italian Swiss roots her office assembles
landscape architects architects and
biologists she has had projects in
Senegal and across Switzerland and has
collaborated with artists and scientists
to engage questions of dendro technology
reforestation and erosion she brings the
same cultural curiosity and scientific
rigor to her seminar and we are
delighted to have her please join me in
welcoming Dominic Gigi I read the text
it's a text I was writing a long time
ago in 2003 during my master of science
at ETH a text of analysis of the text of
under a collabo
the land as a valley persists what is
interesting is that this text was
influencing my way of thinking and
performing in landscape architecture
yanti today and I wasn't so aware about
that that preparing this lecture I was
reading again old texts and what is
interesting for me is the part where the
land is a result of a long and the slow
stratification you will see why so
I go I mean you you have you read it so
I called my lecturer city erosion the
folding of landscape it's a translation
of the German the FAL tomb from the land
shaft and what is interesting is that I
I was developing a little bit this kind
of thinking about city erosion in 2017
so it's two years ago and I will present
some projects for totally for about that
so what is erosion geologically it
refers to a process in the exogenous
part of the rock cycle the erosion is
whether it rock and soil create and
ultimately destroys tear and forms such
as mountains and valleys erosion is
therefore responsible for the morphology
of our earth our discipline is concerned
with the teaching of form under the
influence of time both on a large and a
non small scale it examines the
processes that influence morphology and
uses this knowledge to intervene
morphological in short and long-term so
I ask you to emerge a little bit in the
drawings because my words my drawings
are better than my words and my English
so I hope I will be able to read very
well for you that's very important now
this drawing here in the context of
physical urbanisation and erosion is the
phenomenon of the deposition of soil
layers an event that can be perceived
daily as a part of cycle on construction
sites interesting is to rethink the
origin of construction material for the
city in terms of sustainability I
propose a closed recycling system of
material coming from different
construction sites of the city
controlled and managed by the city
persistent erosion destroys our
morphology and landscape as long as no
endogenous processes that cause an
elevation of the land surface contracted
it would be a tectonic 'el force
I call this counteracting forces
foldings so it's the one on your right
for me
the folding of the landscape means the
conceptual as well as the physical
creation of landscape from the hidden
last rock and layers from the place we
determine which layers are meaningful
and can be made visible again I will
illustrate how this happens by means of
three foldings of the landscape so I
will speak about first of all
stratification afforestation and
infiltration in certification the
comparison of geological and
anthropogenic processes is interesting
over time the sequence of recognizable
soil layers emerged which can be
disturbed and reorganized by human
intervention suddenly several layers of
time appear on the surface this
phenomenon can be observed very well in
Rome where it's known as the etiquettes
yoni all material was reused in order to
build something new and as a result the
old was made visible what concerns as in
the landscape is the recognition of soil
layers and their significance in
morphological processes the question
arises how the soil develop
this question emerged in a competition
for the design of the city park in OTL
in Bavaria in Germany no traveling is
located on a gravel plain between the
Bavarian forests and the lower bavaria
hills the plain was covered by wind
deposits during Ice Age you see it it's
in the middle there this deposits formed
the basis of the fertile soil in this
region so on the left you see the
deposition of the Fertile layer by the
wind in the middle the second one is the
how it is originally so you have the
gravel and the sand and that of the
Fertile layer then where it's written
angry what we are doing we are shifting
the layer of the Fertile deposits on one
side and then creating of course a new
landscape so by simply shifting the
layer in the form of erosion and
application new morphological and pedo
logical conditions are created which
then are expressed by the type of
planting woody plants grow on the
fertile soils and the rough meadow is
created on the gravel layer as you see
on the right in terms of design a double
figure is created the Fertile layer
above the gravel and sand is removed and
used in the northern half of the park to
create a space this is in contrast to
the open space in the south and half so
where it is orange on this open level
with the exposed gravel and sand as
subsoil aggressive Anna is created on
the right you see also a little bit the
topography so in order to explain that
the green is the application the orange
is the removal of this material
and here you see the figure on a plane
and I will show some pictures so the
park meadow framed by a small wood
becomes the more intensively used part
of the park whereas the grass Havana has
a hide biodiversity and vastness due to
the simple and coloring of the gravel
layer the planting concept is based on
the soil composition and the spatial
effects of the park so in green we see
largest specimen trees with root balls
which are planted along the elevations
which are compacted by machine planted
forest trees and I'm sorry at the edges
there is a large sowing area of woody
plant which is the orange part and then
the yellow one are the grasses of the
savanna of course so we didn't build the
park we want only the second prize and I
think the municipality were a little bit
afraid of telling to the political
people we shift a fertile layer of land
somewhere else so I that was a little
bit the problem then for the project on
the subject of stratification is the
things right back in Zurich it's again
the design of the seed park with a
special morphological history we won the
competition in 2010 after four years of
planning so it's no secret that glacier
have shaped the Swiss landscape Zurich
on the Ice Age it's a little refused by
Oswald here and in the background you
see the Alps the link later advanced
several times and retreated into the
Alps again for a longer period of time
according with a change of cold and warm
periods in the rhythm of some ten
thousand year the lake was formed and
huge amounts of material were
transported by the forces of the glacier
and their meltwater this process took
millions of years from the same angle
this postcard expresses the pride of
Industry at that time
and also cumin
is perhaps
you will not see the clothes
that's why I don't know
funny does it better I mean so we have
been here with this post very nice
postcard
as you can see man has been responsible
for major changes in the landscape in a
relatively short period of time as most
of the industrial cities Durack is
constantly being demolished and rebuilt
where the removal and deposition of
materials are enormous so we humans are
probably the most erosive agent per unit
of time the project about city rosin is
located in the former industrial area
and Jurek west you see the lake of
zurich and then of course request
between the right track field of the
railway on the south and the course of
the river limit on the north so an area
of strong change in the request
apartments leisure facilities and jobs
for thousands of people are being
created in rapid succession with this
background the pink slide park of course
is an important element in the supply of
open space in to requests the the light
gray are all the new buildings and the
the black ones you see are industries so
they will be all transformed and at the
period of the in the time of the
competition
they were planning the light ones which
are all constructed today so in 2010 the
city started the open competition for
the public park and for a building for
educational facility when we came to the
site the surrounding area was a huge
construction site
as you can see here so at the time the
central part of the project area was
still occupied by an allotment garden
which was approximately six feet lower
than the surrounded industrial area we
had wondered whether the project site
had been excavated we discovered the
opposite so here you see the slope while
in the course of industrialization that
terrain was filled up by six feet in
order to relocate industry and commerce
along the railway the area of the former
things light remained at the original
level
today's city level is the result of
about two centuries of overlaid material
the name of the area thinks white
actually refers to the way the land was
used till the 19th century in German
white means pestilent and Fink's from
fingsten Pentecost
following the tradition countrymen used
to bring their cattle to graze on the
common land during Pentecost here you
see on the left side you see the place
so this pasture land
he entered the 19th century that things
why it was a damn public pastureland
with the start of industrialization soil
transportation took place this
topographic peculiarity of the site will
remain as an element of identity for the
future Park the transition from the
rather humid green depression of the
things right in the middle of the park
to the rather dry mineral city level
takes place via various layers of soil
like you see in the middle sketch the
understanding of the site through a
specific timeframe and its formation of
sediment layers led to the idea of a
sunken garden as inspiration for the
project I hope that also the
architecture students know what a sunken
garden is it's a paradise with water so
in the middle the damp hollow area where
tree grows whereas the edges are
strongly formulated with built angles
articulated through the use of walls
stairs and terraced embankments so on
the west part of course different
vegetation types grow also on different
soils because it's the point is really
that the soil and the stratification of
this soil now that's the plan of the
competition of course it developed and
got really complicated now I will lead
you through the park we will start
looking to the embankment on the west
then we will have a look to the meadow
and to the wall and meter but there is
also found a very nice fountain I will
show some model so working models we
were constructing in order to really
design the space and control it collage
and then of course pictures of the
constructed park so here you see the
model of the embankment the scale is one
two hundred I don't know in feet and
what would you you know it perhaps and
it's the wider part of the park and here
with this perspective so it should have
been or it is really the wilder part
this the collage for the competition we
made and here is the constructed part
with ruderal vegetation and it was about
cool collected seeds that was really
interesting
then the meadow with the trees so with
the old oak trees and here as it
construct today it looked like behind
you see some buildings of Miley Pater
architects a dinner
behind and here that was the model and
the collage of the wall we wanted really
to have a particular wall we had this
very hard cut existing so the shapes of
the the park I have to say we didn't
decide the shape it was given by the
side itself and how it is construct
today and then the fountain of course on
the left you see the spurts you know
with the Renaissance building of Roger
dinner the green behind is the prime
tower and it's the the tallest building
in Zurich
so as a symbol of the current urban
development need to request and the long
Europa alley which is along the rail
track the park has been created as a
recycling Park City erosion was the
subject of the construction process to a
large extent it consists of demolition
material from former industrial
buildings and platform facilities along
that arroba alley
in addition addition humans was
transferred from local sports field
construction sites the dead wood was
coming from the city forest and the old
public urban furniture of the city was
reused we really tried to make this Park
from all the materials of the city now I
would really like to point out where the
arrow Palace it's a it's an urban
development area very big one and in the
moment we were constructing the park or
a little bit we knew it before of course
we discovered that we could use this
material which is unusual and we found
it very interesting
so here you see it's part of the of the
station of Zurich and we could use
exactly these materials here and now I
would like to show a little video about
the construction
the holes are the holes for the trees
the fountain you see it should have it's
made of concrete so it had to be really
compact because it's not natural stone
and it was very complicated to construct
it
it was all about reused also concrete
material and here the skeleton of the
park the embankment art
so as I said the skeleton of the park is
made out of concrete and we had many
different types of Bethan so we had one
the wall then we had the embankments who
had the pavement of course which is six
and all was constructed with very used
concrete so some pictures again of the
construction that we call that the waves
of these embankments which have been
constructed at the end by hand so we
could really yes
model it on site I would say they didn't
like us so much because we were always
remodeling a little bit but it was fun
for us
then that's material from the station
demolition along the rope alley which
has been reused in this embankment and
of course also with the seeds and flora
which was existing at that time and here
you see how it looks like at the
beginning today it's completely green
then the wall of course it's a 200 meter
long wall and we decided to construct it
with this demolition material and in
it's like a modern drywall and also do
you say drywall and we made many studies
about that because we want a wall with a
particular porosity and we wanted also
that planes could colonize the wall so
here we made some collages with some
colors and we made a mock up because we
didn't want perhaps I returned here we
didn't want that people would design so
that they con people on the construction
site would have a plan for that so we
had really - yes to make some
experiments with them so you see how
it's done the the big stones have been
put inside randomly I would say and that
was giving them this expression we try
those with colors and pigments but we
didn't like that a lot so we decided for
that one gray voila then we reused this
legs of the benches the old ranges of
the city and made some new benches which
are much longer and with a new color of
chorus so we were a very big team for us
and yes
now after stratification furrows
afforestation this folding counteracts
surface erosion of the soil it is based
on the fact that trees are the most
successful stabilizer and fertilizer of
soil so we traveled to Senegal in a
country located in the transitory dry
zone of the Sahel
where for thousands of years the climate
has determined the occurrence of the
soil coloring layer of forests and the
shifting of their borders the
cultivation and care of trees was an
early form of agriculture in Africa
especially in the transitional area
between the desert and the forest so the
project area of the same the botanical
refuge is located on the Massif dune yes
it's a project I was developing with
Mueller for the sentiment we are an
association of African dance teacher who
decided to develop this project so you
see where it is it's cells from the car
I cannot point it but the car is this
peninsula going out on the sea and the
south of tube Abdullah which is a former
fishing village as you can see here
perhaps you should remember the shape of
this of the perimeter in red because in
the sketches then I will make it more
abstract intent so the massif dunya is a
hilly landscape which today is mainly
covered by a dry savanna a mosaic like
Park landscape characterised by grasses
thorn bush and individual groups of
trees as you see originally the hills
were covered by alternating open forests
and forest with a closed tree later as a
result of the water shortage of the last
50 years and the uncontrolled
deforestation the yields morphology has
changed
here you see the Fertile lowland around
the hills which is Purcell and used for
agriculture crop fields and pasture here
during the rainy season which changes a
lot really
in 2002 Jaclyn Osman puia with Congolese
roots and her partner Reuben free fell
from Zurich founded the sound a man who
you on the leased land with the
intention of revitalizing the decorated
hilly landscape in the long term so knew
the name of the project is the highest
hill on the sides and of the entire
region
you
so for 50 years the lead has been
devastated but by uncontrolled land use
so slash and burn and grazing and
deforestation and the resulting damage
caused by wind and precipitation at
certain points the bear laterite crust
moves this is a picture of 2002 so of
course it was not really it was really
dry due to the migration to the cities
and the idealization of urban life in
the rural regions the cultivation of the
landscape is neglected and falls into
oblivion in the long term under this
circumstances the project tries to set
clear signals to counteract this
tendency promoting a forestation and
agroforestry since 2002 through various
revitalization measures the sandmen
region has succeeded in becoming an
ecological and cultural model for the
surrounding region the new represents a
botanical refuge a kind of living gene
pool for endangered subtropical tree
species that would otherwise disappear a
pool of species was created that
stabilized the soil and regenerate
spontaneously in the project area as
well as the entire
region the process is controlled in the
tree nursery regional seats are
collected and then stored and secured
their young trees are trained and later
transplanted the following revitalizes
right revitalisation metres has been
implemented in the last 10 years so
fencing of the entire site to prevent
uncontrolled raising and forest area was
the first intervention it's the it's
clear I think then the intensive
reforestation around the controlled
areas of the housing and around the tree
nursery it's a dark green and the
extensive reforestation and natural
regeneration supported by soil
stabilization I will show some pictures
about that it's the orange part of the
sketch and the khaki green it's the
introduction of an area for experimental
planting and sowing according to
topography and without any irrigation
and you see on the right at the
topography and what we tried to
experiment so the fence I show some
pictures of course the corridor area so
the stabilization of the soil that was
in 2002 and that was in 2009 during the
dry season and that was three years ago
so you see really the big difference
without planting intensively
and then where we plant the trees
intensively around the housings and
around the dance floor area and where
the animals are and then that's
interesting the most important
cultivated tree of the savannas the
baobab tree as the trees often hollow it
was used by men as a natural water
cistern for everyday irrigating the
surrounding fields for this reason many
baobabs were planted by farmers around
the villages and also in the zone talent
ouya as you can see and they also
regenerate so it's very successful here
it's one in the tree nursery and here
you see a picture where it's darker red
it's the area with all the planes after
more or less seven years today it's
really the whole figure is completely a
forested the Sun man puja supports also
many activities with local people so
conferences of local I drew forest
engineers seed collection projects with
the mama of the neighboring villages
they collect many leaves from bushes
also for producing teas and daughter
things then educational trades for
primary school students which are really
happier always to visit the the tree
nursery I had
but there and then of course it exchange
projects with the farmer of the region
right here here you see the different
trails of the one big Hills all of the
signal so we have a tree trail where the
tree nursery is the e we have in light
view the panorama trail going up to the
hill the recreation trail in dark blue
going to the dance floor and tour
facilities and then they of course the
adventure trail on the edges so it's
really a beautiful park landscape so we
are reaching the last folding and it's
about the infiltration of water which is
a big issue in the city
[Music]
project checks if I easy to fire your
men could do could do 62 Matt mahadeva
nerve centers kitty come to Vitesse
kostas available on the net return of
lucifer it's just to show you how water
can surprise you so in the cities we
have to deal with the natural processes
of water of course and the development
of big water infrastructures has been
very dominant in our landscape so the
last project la macchina maravillosa is
a more conceptual interpretation of the
folding infiltration it is a temporary
installation which emerged from the Los
Angeles in 2009 and we won the second
prize we are : tonne coronary week and I
and we had the chance to be live at the
beginning of the competition different
locations were available for selection
we had chosen the underworld of the
patrol line and to to contrast the
above-ground garden world with an
underground garden world the history of
the hidden garden work begins with the
drilling of the new metro line through
various layers of rock some of which are
interrupted by a strong and
water-bearing
layer this fact lead
this fact led to this line being
strongly concreted and in comparison to
the other lines represents a very
massive infrastructure so normally metro
stations are rather nonsensical places
we wanted to bring life underground
especially in the water bearing layer to
light in a simple way to a temporary
intervention the result was a meditative
projection of the moss dancing in the
water using something very easy an
overhead projector projector so that was
the material the most the smallest
aquarium we found the the projector of
course and we had to choose so choose
the demos we had to choose the places
where to project it in the metro station
and we got a projector and we had also
to choose a kind of moss which is light
which is performing in the water and
which is also growing very fast because
we wanted to visualize this aspect of
the of the growing end of the time so as
you can see here a series of the growing
moss
so the development of this intervention
required various experiments which we
recorded in some videos here we are in
the metro it's not really a metro
station but it's the underground station
of the s banging Zurich before going to
Lausanne
it's for throwing the rocks on the
that's great it's nice
the creations of the
[Music]
the people and so we had to develop yes
structure for that protection for the
the projector also in order not to
disturb people and we were visualizing
that with collage and below you see the
the conditions of the metro station in
Lausanne it's the more East Asia metro
station which was also nice because you
know he's a dance choreographer and we
were projecting a dancing moss hopefully
he's happy with all was happy with that
and we discovered that was our solution
so an oil tank we could choose the
envelope so the exterior part of the oil
tank or the interior one and because of
the the size of the projector and
everything how to handle it maintain it
during the year we were projecting that
we decided to to choose the exterior oil
tank and it was also interesting to see
how it looked like with the light so I
think it's very nice we had to make of
course the drawings of the projector and
because we realized that the wall we
were projecting on was not completely
perpendicular we had to make a
distortions of also of the of the moss
so it's the the blue green part is
distorting so we had to put it up there
and to fix it also
make a hole on the oil tank
[Music]
thank you
[Applause]
in Senegal
synagogue this
that's progressing and it will not stop
of course you know but the part of
planning and is finished but they are
always developing more projects about
that so will not stop of course most of
all because of the the climate change it
will always be interesting to experiment
with the seeds
[Music]
yes
that was yes so if we call the the baton
it's a baby tone
I don't know where he or how you call
that but you can implement it with
recycled material from other bet on
which you are demolition so it's of
course you have it's a different
technique and we had to add some more
fluid things but we had also the
something to be really the structure and
the basically the height and then the
last part was modeled then cover it and
remodel it yes but it was they took I
think one month so that they Enterprise
to understand how to construct because
we we're not always happy at the
beginning and it's concrete is concrete
it's not you have to find it out yes but
we of course because the it's shaped we
have to shape of course but it's really
going with the topography and we wanted
to create different terraces and create
a space for ecology there
[Music]
a billion of the military fort all as
far as how they retained
they are yes they are from 20
centimeters high to 1 meter so it's yes
and then of course at the end we also we
had always more wishes it was nice to
make like the maquillage so to them make
different surfaces so we have rougher
ones we have really dedicated ones and
also to play a little bit with the
concrete we could make some cuts for
example in the data where the playground
was or we decided to make where the real
station where in the baton inside that
we're really many details with this bit
our wave we cut some holes we were
thinking they will be very happy to put
some water and beers inside so it's it's
really a beautiful material because you
at the end you can make a lot of things
if you don't have any steel and we
didn't have any steel because it wasn't
so big yes and the wall the 200 meter
long
all I have to say there was a wall
behind that because of the other parcel
or lot and so we didn't have to make
such a massive wall but big enough to
put inside this this rocks so we it was
about 40 centimeters without being a
statical wall capisci
okay yes
so we it was a mixture the of course it
was more complex than to say we put the
gravel from the from the valley but it
was a mixture of that material and then
a collection of seeds from the region
around Durack and we at the beginning we
started to you have like terraces or
islands and we had a color concept
telling which kind of chorus would grow
at the beginning but then of course with
time it would mix together so as you
have seen a picture the rural vegetation
was really a mixture of that but so we
it was all about sowing and we planted
only the trees
otherwise we didn't plant anything and
of course the meadow which is in part an
extensive meadow and an intensive meadow
and then a sports field meadow so it was
yes
you want to read the beginning yes we
can discuss that I only want that you
get the point of the foldings because I
like the four links
what
yes
this is a very
[Music]
[Music]
if
so yes
but then we return because you want to
read it then you you will okay I mean
yes most of the projects are a result of
a competition the good thing is that you
can choose really what you want to do
you have to win them of course but it's
very different that if you have to have
to say yes because you you need really
work and about the approach it's we
learned and/or it's yes I think I
learned it also as a biologist really to
observe aside first of all and when I
observe a sight I really want to know
everything so the geology the morphology
the water and I always try to find out
what is the most important part of that
processes for this side of course also
with the attraction of of men so we are
a part of this process for example in
the project of the things right Park the
fact that the lower
level was a pest Rowland and then we
constructed the morphology the
topography so the industry was doing
that it's only to say it's not about
natural processes its we are part of
that but we discovered of course we have
many more projects than that but there
is always one important component Aires
for examples
housings where we were designing the
waters of the water infiltration which
usually you are you are canonizing all
the water and you are done you don't see
it we want to see it because for example
the the soils are really permeable in
Perm well no future and the water is not
allowed to pass through and so it
becomes an issue and everywhere with or
there is a project close to a woods and
the wood is because it's a very strong
element of this landscape then we would
like to work with the wood and how with
it it develops and how is it possible to
have a wood or the idea of a wood which
is then maintained so we really try to
work with the place I would say that's
the the beginning and so it's
yes
but what was interesting so my career
started with Carol Anton we made those
the master together and she's an
architect or she was an architect I was
a biologist and so we we really could
implement our work she had more yes she
constructed more and I was more in the
processes and in the vegetation and that
was really a good implementation of our
work and then suddenly it was
interesting to see that I was much more
free in constructing because I I wanted
to experiment it that she was always
asking more things about vegetation and
if you are coming from another
discipline the interesting thing is that
you you bring something new and you
discover it and then it begins to be
interesting of course
yes
[Music]
yes so that's very important so I began
telling that erosion is destroying and
creating landscape and now I mean that
in a really physical way but also in a
conceptual way so when you destroy you
you then have to counteract it so it's
your that's the folding the moment where
for example in the infiltration the the
mcavee maravillosa it was about two
showing this layer inside a metro
station which is completely constructed
in this underground world so I bring a
layer I decide which layer I want to
make visible so also really in terms of
perception of where we are we are in a
metro station but we want to know that
there is water and then I work with a
plan because the plane is animating
everything and I know that crypto guns
are able to be in in a place without any
light so that is the conceptual one in
the stratification it's about for
example of the park
there are many components that the most
obvious is that you are the more there
is demolition because of development
close to your site and you take this
material and construct something new you
could say see the in this way but then
there is also the this thing that about
our processes forming a landscape as I
was saying the fixed by the lower layer
which is the original one and then we
put some more material so it's very
physical and in the afforestation of
course it's the same you contract
erosion and that's really the erosion of
all these landscapes in the Sahel so
because of the climate not the climate
change it's something happening since a
long time but so for me it was a
I wanted to find like a line of thinking
and and performing in the landscape
which has really to do with the
landscape but which then if you see this
drawing is forming a new one from inside
so from the place and with drawings
perhaps it's telling you more than my
words as I said I'm better in drawing
and I'm not an artist
thank you
[Applause]
