thanks everyone for coming out to the
final event of the spring semester
series tonight of course you have only
more Knowlton's 2018-2019 Lefevre fellow
I don't know why I'm holding that but
who will say a few things about the work
she's been doing this year followed by
the opening of her exhibition drawing
drawings which are all sitting on right
now Emily I don't think needs much of an
introduction all told she's been here
longer than most of us I think she's a
graduate of Milton architecture and the
Graduate School of Architecture planning
preservation at Columbia University
where she earned an M arc and was
awarded the AIA Henry Adams medal in
2017 Emily founded the practice M R
studio along with John Ricci and the
same year both Emily and John came back
to Knowlton to serve as the MiG urban
visiting professors at the Knowlton
School prior to returning to Knowlton
Emily has worked for a host of
architectural practices including big
bureau spectacular and her work has
recently been exhibited at Columbia
University and the A & D Museum in Los
Angeles now if you've had the chance to
see Emily's seminar last spring the
current work of her senior studio or the
design work of M our studio you may have
a sense that Emily is preoccupied with
drawing and that her recent work has
evidence an interest in the relationship
between drawing techniques and a host of
pavilions competition proposals and
small single-family residences now maybe
some of you know that the ACS a
conference just happened a few weeks ago
and I was talking with someone about
this conference and we were joking about
what seems to be the imperative of every
ACS a conference to devote something
like 2/3 of its sessions to the question
of drawing or slightly more aggressively
questions like what happened to drawing
why doesn't anyone draw anymore how do
we start drawing again etc etc and these
are types of questions that have been
around now for something like a quarter
of a century at least since the
prevalence of computer drafting and
modeling platforms and presume that
drawings are both essential to the
nature of architecture itself and
largely distinct from the computational
drafting processes that have become
ubiquitous in schools and offices these
questions have attempted to reconcile
the simple fact that while drawing has
historically been one of the means to
which architecture renders itself
distinct from adjacent practices like
construction or the visual arts it's
also something that seems lesson
like the computationally driven
procedures through which most
architectural work now occurs now
without casting any aspersions on those
types of questions and potentially which
are potentially important and useful
what I find very interesting about
Emily's work is that her questions don't
seem to be these more familiar ones
rather they indicate an emerging
response to the problem of drawing from
a generation of practitioners who have
never known anything but drawing as
problematic
Emily's interest in drawing doesn't
attempt to essential eyes drawing it
doesn't necessarily see drawings as
something that need to be recuperated it
doesn't oppose drawing with computing
and it doesn't attempt to formulate
drawings fundamental definition instead
the work seems intent on preserving
drawings most problematic features as
both an artifact and inaction as both
like and unlike digital modeling and is
both critical to our understanding of
architecture and mostly secondary to the
professions material procedures in
preserving not drawing but the problem
with drawing and treating it as an
object of speculation Emily's work seems
to suggest that the kind of disciplinary
coherence we might imagine drawing to
have once provided might now be found in
work like Emily's that cleverly manages
to prolong drawings problems so do you
hear more about these problems let's
welcome Emily Moore ok thank you so much
Curtis
and thank you all for coming and I'm
super flattered and super excited to
share this work with you can you guys
hear me okay yes okay great so Curtis
thank you so much for this awful
introduction definitely gave me some
ideas and I just have a handful of
thanks to get out of the way because I
really am so grateful to be here talking
to you all
so Todd Doug and Jackie for giving me
the opportunity to do this project and
the the platform to share it with all of
you to IT to Craig and Jeff and their
help setting up a private network to
facilitate all of the the raspberry PI's
that we ended up working with from
inside the gallery to the staff whether
fill up on a ladder yesterday or Carla
helping me with like hundreds of Amazon
orders maybe the students that had to
shuttle them from the front desk up to
the mailroom I appreciate all of you and
then of course to the students that
helped with the installation itself
because there were so many of you and
some people helped for you know 30
minutes and people helped for six hours
but that's okay either way it wouldn't
have come together without without all
of your help some special thanks to
Sangha Kochhar for managing the gallery
so thoughtfully and patiently to my
structural engineer who's also my sister
Sarah Moore
to my graduate assistant brendan doherty
who ended up being more of a
collaborator and to my partner john
Ricci for being endlessly supportive of
the project and is here today even
though he's also opening a fellowship
exhibition on Monday so let me know if
you're interested in further details
because I think it'll absolutely be the
trip that the trip will be worth it to
see his presentation as well so I'm glad
that Curtis mentioned this the seminar
from last year because I thought it
would be a good place to start
sorry when talking with Stephen Turek
about this project a few months ago he
the the favorite project not this
project specifically he mentioned the
sort of interesting connection between
the title so drawing drawings as well as
the the sort of active drawing and then
the way that some of these drawing work
robots work which is to pull up on this
cord right so it's sort of like drawing
drawing like a bucket out of a well or
drawing upwards so it sort of works in
in a lot of ways similar to the way that
the hanging of this this tapestry went
last year for drawing seminar and so one
of the reasons why I'm so interested in
it
and was really struck by the the
installation of it last year was because
it added this like tactility to the
drawings that I had not experienced
before so I've always been really
interested in in model making as well as
drawings of course but I think that that
there's a real disconnect between what
we're doing to make work here in
architecture school or outside of
architecture school and the way that
it's actually coming into the world
so with model making will often 3d print
a handful of parts we'll build some of
them out of foam core and and sort of
glue it all together and it doesn't come
all from one place whereas with with a
digital drawing you you make it in a lot
of a lot of different ways digitally but
then it comes out of the plotter it's
it's a sort of one step process so I was
really struck by the way that just
giving the drawings a different texture
gave me all these ideas about the
project that I ended up doing this year
so I started the fellowship last
semester with this this first drawing
which we actually did on the three axis
mill in the shop it's titled door swing
house it's a sort of large door swing as
sort of populated to be an apartment and
and it achieved a similar effect to the
tapestry and that it gave me the sort of
texture and like unpredictability that I
was really interested in seeing in
drawings and I was also interested in
the way that
the Machine sort of added to the concept
of the drawing as well so I added these
like sort of plus marks if you can see
my mouse the plus marks to indicate like
where the plane of the bed of the mill
was hitting so that when you see that
there's meant to be a plus mark in a
certain place you know that there's like
a little bit of wavering in the z-axis
so shortly after that experiment Brennan
and I built our first drawing robot so
this one lived in my office for a long
time and was funnily the most reliable
of all of the the robots that we've
built first try what was really a
success so this this one runs through
processing it through this interface
that's called polar graph controller so
none of this is is designed by us it's
it's teetered with bias but but we're
working with a whole host of open source
information and lots and lots of YouTube
videos and so I pretty quickly moved
from experimenting with the tools to to
trying to formulate what the project
itself was about because immediately it
became apparent to me that using the
using the robots to create the the
drawings wasn't sort of enough it was an
exciting process but it wasn't certainly
wasn't you know the impetus for for what
I was drawing of what I was designing so
the purpose of today of course is to
open the exhibition for you guys for a
while visit it so the talk is broken
into five steps the three components of
the exhibition which are the frames the
robots and the drawings the process of
the installation of the gallery which
was a totally new experience for me to
be the one that designed the show and
installed the show was such an exciting
opportunity and then the last step is to
get up walk down the stairs and go check
out the gallery because I'm really
excited to share it with you and hear
what you all think so
I became really interested in in this
exhibition at the Louvre last summer
which was about the frames of Lulu so
the exhibition had a handful of frames
that had their paintings in them but a
lot of frames that were shown without
the paintings and reading reviews of
this exhibition and reading about it a
little bit there there's all sorts of
there's all sorts of thought that goes
into pairing the frame with the painting
so there are some cases where you where
you sort of have the painting and you
have the frame that are from the
original artists and they've survived
time but most cases the curators are in
most cases the curators are
pairing frames with paintings and it's
it's sort of this you know super
specific process of how you how you just
make these decisions and and the
exhibition also is able to highlight the
frames themselves which are you know
super bumpy and super interesting and
are you know their own works of art and
so I was really interested because the
some of the reviews of the exhibition
talked about these sort of indications
or different types of like festooning
that indicate where the frame is coming
from so maybe a frame that's coming from
Northern Europe has a different type of
leaf on it than a frame from southern
Europe and then of course there's these
this mention of like new world
festooning which includes ears of corn
four column capitals and then here these
are tobacco leaves so I thought that
this was like a really excellent idea
and these exist in in real life you know
this is at Monticello this is at the US
Capitol building and this idea that you
could sort of sample from and capture
objects of your surroundings to make
architecture so then that led me to this
George Hirsi book the lost meaning of
classical architecture which goes into
great detail about how all of these
different sort of classical orders and
classical festooning how that all came
to be so these are a couple of
illustrations that sort of show the way
that a temple might have been decorated
for a sacrifice and how these different
types of student what have affected you
know the design of of column capitals
all the different dentals and and
everything that you find in a classical
architecture and I was really interested
in the way that these sort of
indications of place could make their
way into objects that are designed so in
this case carriage heads or columns so I
thought what better
locals are studen than pieces of Milton
Hall so like Curtis said I've been here
for quite a while it's not meant to be
like a nostalgic thing although I could
see how it how it reads this way but I
passed projects I've been really
interested in sampling and readymade and
sort of mashup and I was thinking about
trying some of that work tonight but I
really think that
this is a bit different than then
already made or a mash-up it's really
it's really a texture that I'm that I'm
sampling from that I'm taking from the
site of the actual project so I found
the shingles to be super compelling this
sign that's or sort of banner that's
carved into the front porch that says
Milton School of Architecture and the
text and the scale of that text which
which was brought to my attention when I
don't know if anybody saw this other
campus building sort of east on Woodruff
undergoing a renovation and these
enormous sort of carved text pieces of
text that that are just like they're big
they're resting on like Rex in this
photo and so I think it it's you know I
was interested in celebrating something
that maybe he gets gets looked over most
of the time and all the while like
frames and the design of frames is still
sort of stewing for me so I saw this
this gallery show of this contemporary
painter Andy Dixon and he's super
interested in and sampling like
Renaissance or classical content and his
paintings but in this particular
collection he painted the frames onto
the canvases which to me defeated the
point a little bit especially after I
had read about all of the exquisite
frames and all of the process of like
collecting the objects that go into that
frame those frames so I decided to take
the local festooning of Knowlton Hall
and create frames of my own so with a
number of pieces of primitive geometry
that that that were sort of sourced by
loose tracings of the the frames from
that exhibition that I spoke about
earlier I began to sort of divide and
mix up pieces of the elevations I'm all
at one-to-one scale so we have the the
text the old school of architecture text
and the way that this starts to become
abstracted and the text becomes more of
a piece of geometry and less less of a
like a piece of signage and then because
things are nice and threes and because
the site you know if I'm doing
site-specific festooning I can also look
to other buildings that have occupied
the site so
says ives hall everybody's probably
familiar with ives drive it's where you
get your delivery food so ives hall
predated Knowlton Hall and had some set
some interesting festooning of its own
and so these like four bays and the
front elevation as well as some of this
brickwork that you can see in those nice
photographs that I found in the archive
but I was also interested beyond the
site specificity of Ives Hall in an
identifiable unit to this surface that I
was I was mashing up and using to create
these frames so unlike the shingles and
the text and the other two sources
bricks have an own scale to them and so
they are a better indication for the
purposes of this work for what the the
scale of the project is so I went on to
create nine of these frames and I'll
just cycle through them quickly you'll
see them soon enough all through a
similar process mostly without rotating
any of the original geometry so where
you don't see bricks on at the you know
straight horizontal it's because it's
from an archway or one of these details
that I showed in the image and then a
second way of framing that I began to
think about was the frame of the gallery
and a lot of this idea sort of came from
my feeling that the the gallery is not a
super neutral space it has so much sort
of festooning of its own if you could
stretch your imagination a little bit so
the the enormous sort of mullions of the
window wall right here the sloped
ceiling the the door creating a frame of
its own so I began to think about like
what it would mean to create a space to
look at frames where you could frame
your view of the frames in different
ways and that also would consider the
the space the gallery of sites of
replicas and of doubling so another
super striking feature of the space I
think are the hanging sea channel which
we also see above us here and so I
wanted to replicate both the language of
the sea channel but also try to
replicate the way the sea channel work
you know structurally but I'm getting
ahead of myself a little bit and and so
just thinking about ways of occupying
the gallery through this model which
would also be a part of the gallery so
we see the model of the model and the
model and then a little preview of what
the the frames ended up looking like and
so the second component of the project
are of course the the robots so I was
directed towards this installation
titled mural by Diller Scofidio which
was part of their retrospective at the
Whitney Museum and the the project
consisted of the sort of disintegration
of
the wall of the museum which is like a
very you know beautiful piece of
architecture that they they are
indicating that is like sort of always
changing and impermanent and and sort of
had introduced this timeline to the
exhibition so the exhibition showed a
lot of their their work it's a
retrospective but this piece was for the
exhibition specifically and it involved
a drill and a a you know homemade robot
that slid across the wall at random
intervals and and sort of slowly pulled
pieces of the wall away and created
perforation between one space to another
over time and so continuing to think
about the the robots still the same one
that we had initially built
I was super interested in this like
variable of time that was added to the
to the project and and also the variable
of the like technology as material which
is something that Ashley Schaeffer talks
about a little bit in one of the essays
that's in the catalogue of the
retrospective so that the technology
could be sort of a texture of the piece
something that's visible and present as
well as as a piece you know as a
function so around this time we built
a second type of robot so this one had
had new challenges of its own but we
were able to begin to fit it into the
frames themselves which I'd already
fabricated at this point and like really
paying attention to the form of the
robots themselves and how that is part
of the piece as well it's not just the
lines that it's that it's laying on the
paper and then you remove the robot but
it's actually part of the piece itself
and then the third part the drawings
that go within the frames so these three
examples are sort of two and a half
examples are of of drawings that are
looking at objects in a super literal at
one to one way as far as what their
their presence within the architectural
drawing is so in this drawing of the
lawrence residents tom main draws his
glasses which he's put down on the desk
into the drawing and then there's
there's a handful of these sort of like
mashup piles of objects that end up in
forming buildings in in the architecture
in the age of reason texts and then of
course within the Robin Evans
translations from drawing to building he
sort of debunks the projection of the
ceiling onto the ground surface and then
back to the the Diller and Scofidio
reference the way that within slow house
you might view a scene through a
television screen rather than actually
looking at it yourself
and so in deciding what to draw within
the frames that I had created I was
looking at all these references and
thought why not just draw what the
frames are framing so in the image
on your left the this sort of masonite
or pegboard is removed from the frames
that you're able to see the the joist
beyond the structure that I was
mentioning a little bit earlier and then
if you use your imagination a little bit
and look at the edge of the frame that
you see here you can imagine it being
completed with the drawing here and how
the drawing within the frame is just
simply drawing what's projected beyond
but with the drawing process with the
the robot came an additional type of
texture so here in this case it's it's
the sort of the spot enos of the z-axis
which I think creates like this sort of
beautiful like bald spots is what I was
calling them and the the uniqueness that
you get from you know creating the same
drawing over and over again maybe using
a different marker or at a different
time of the day when the Arduino is
about to overheat and it's sort of
freaking out or maybe here when you set
the the home point at a slightly wrong
place and the entire drawing becomes a
little bit of a funhouse mirror
and in this drawing so pieces of tape
that were like stitching the the drawing
together also become part of the of the
piece itself misalignments happen so you
know the the hatching that's meant to
hatch around this outline of the bolt
gets offset and then a very dramatic
misalignments happen which which was
something that we ran into a lot this
week while we were installing I'll be
the first to admit none of the robots
are as calibrated as I
had sort of hoped or expected that they
would be but nonetheless I think that
the the quality of the drawing sort of
adds to the the texture that I'm
interested in
and I mean I think that the the
opportunities that that this process
gives to work with different types of
tools and different different ways of
printing is also super exciting for me
so if if you're plotting on an inkjet
printer you can't print with white ink
obviously it's just the paper coming
through so the opportunity to use black
paper instead of white paper and the way
that the the line weight can vary you
know within the same drawing with the
same pen just just depending on on how
you're calibrating settings so this past
week that we've been in the gallery has
been a total whirlwind a big difference
between making a pretty large model and
and filling a gallery but I'll admit
that it's been it's it's been really fun
so as I mentioned earlier this idea to
replicate the C channel with the the
wood and I joists so we actually got
down to it and figured out exactly how
this is going to have to happen and and
what we would need to do to install
these and make sure that they could
support their own weight and also the
weight of the frames
so then we ordered I juice and have them
delivered over ordered them of course so
so there's there's going to be scrap an
extra around the shop for a little while
longer we experimented with a new way of
getting materials into the building the
the delivery guy called and asked what
kind of jobsite is this and like I said
very appreciative of the student help it
couldn't have carried these by myself
and so because you know the the drawing
machines themselves are all about the
sort of performance and the duration and
the the variable of time and so I
thought that that that went beyond just
the the robots themselves and that that
you know the performance of installing
the gallery of setting up the joys of
everything is sort of part of it so
installing the frames themselves which
were first wooden frames and then
placing the the the white milled surface
on those and then I've got a few photos
to share with you that that sort of show
the additional ways that the project
sort of draws and frames within the
gallery
so the lighting and the the materiality
of the the gallery was super important
to me with all of the profiles and edges
of the the frames themselves and the way
that those could project onto the ground
to create additional lines and
additional drawings so that the sort of
flatness of the frame becomes super its
three-dimensional and sort of you know
removing the frames from sort of living
on the perimeter of the gallery to
really occupy the center of the space
and to create like a new type of space
so with that I think that is the project
as it as it stands right now it is like
I said always evolving and the drawings
will continue to develop over time so
definitely for the last like couple of
weeks of class here it would be great to
to come back and visit and check in and
see how the drawings are doing and if
you're around over the summer and then
as well so that's it
thank you
you
