okay good evening my name is Karen Lewis
I'm an associate professor of
architecture at the Milton school and it
is my pleasure to welcome Lola Shepard
to the Baumer lecture series tonight
Lola is professor at the School of
Architecture at the University of
Waterloo in Ontario Canada she received
her undergraduate architecture degree
from McGill University and her Master of
Architecture from Harvard University a
architecture cat such significant
practices as jean nouvelles office in
Paris Peter Rose in Cambridge and allies
and Morrison in London Lola Shepherd is
a founding partner at lateral office a
highly collaborative practice which
embraces research driven design
processes an experimental work that
requires synthetic thinking between
architecture culture technology and
environment
Lola directs lateral office with her
partner and fellow Lefevre 'la
fellowship recipients Mason white and
together the practice has been
recognized throughout the world for more
than 15 years the practice has been
lauded exhibited published and funded by
the disciplines most prestigious
institutions the architectural League of
New York the Royal architecture
Institute of Canada the Graham
foundation PA Awards the Venice Biennale
to name only a few
and the wholesome foundation for which
their work on Inuit food gathering nodes
and logistics networks in Canada's High
Arctic territory one at the top prize
laterals work straddles many spheres
infrastructure landscape technology and
informs cultural and performative
practices that are both strategic and
inspired laterals work envisions new
architectural forms by proposing systems
of relationships and connections within
existing conditions for example in their
pamphlet architecture publication
brilliantly titled coupling laterals
infrastructural projects always address
the practices and
protocols of seemingly inert
infrastructural or ecological systems
water farming along the edge of the
Salton Sea for example or reusing old
runway infrastructure in Reykjavik or
even reinforcing the impermeable north
Arctic ice roads laterals practice takes
the acts of augmentation very very
seriously through their keen
observations beautifully drawn through
expansive maps and delicately documented
diagrams lateral intensifies the
opportunities discovered through their
research to quote motionless Taffy's
observations about laterals work the
practice includes purposeful
interventions which are integrated
without any grand gestures or expensive
structures but instead bridge between
traditions and expectations thereby
providing an opportunity to create an
improved future in terms of both
economic opportunity and a sustainable
way of living what lateral office shapes
and what LO the Shepherd opens for our
discipline is not just in an integration
of landscape and architecture theory and
practice or of infrastructure and
ecology but a method of designing that
expands our definitions of architectural
form laterals work positions the formal
work of the architect as one base not in
triangles and Tauruses to quote Keller
Easterling but about timing and patterns
of interactivity of triplets and cycles
subtractions and parallelism switches
and differentials laterals forms are not
based in figures but instead in
practices in relationships and exchanges
and connections augmenting and coupling
those systems through tactical
interventions and they are gorgeously
visualized through the abundant maps
diagrams and Atmospheric drawings that
hallmark their design practice thank you
so much for joining us Lola it is
wonderful to have you back anyway I
would like to ask everybody to join me
in welcoming Willis Shepherd back to the
Norton School
and to the banner lecture series thank
you so much for the invitation it's so
lovely to be back we were here as
Lefevre fellows in 2003 and whoever was
on the selection committee in many ways
helped us sort of start a career in
teaching and research and were really
grateful for that
and I think that a lot of our work and
our interests and our methods really
began with our work here so the the
title of my presentation is rural and
remote spatial practices and new
vernaculars and it sort of is a kind of
framing of several of our recent
projects and design research projects
which i'm going to share with you so I
want to begin with maybe unpacking a
little bit some of these terms so the
first is sort of the rural what is
ruralism and does it even exist
so there's when here's regularly the
statistics that more than 50% of the
world now lives in urban conditions and
it shapes much of what we teach much of
the discourse in the discipline
rightfully so because the the the
questions of how we live in cities and
how they are growing is crucial however
it leaves the other 50% of the
population not living in cities and so
in some ways a lot of our work has been
interested in the sort of peri-urban the
suburban the rural in the remote but I
would say our interests in the remote
and the rural are very different than
some of the kind of contemporary
practitioners and researchers that have
been leading some very interesting
discussions on this topic so Neil
Brenner who ran the urban Theory lab at
the GSD who I think is now just left to
go to Chicago has written a lot about
sort of the idea of planetary urbanism
and the eye
that in a way the whole planet is is in
some ways urbanizing and that the rural
and the remote are really the
hinterlands of our cities they are the
places of resource extraction of food
production of energy production and so
the rural in in his understanding and he
talks about it extensively in his book
implosions explosions is is the rural in
service of the urban simultaneously you
have REM coulis and amo and om a who are
taking a kind of new interest in the
urban having in the rural having been
the sort of father of thinking about the
city and so he talks about the country
the countryside which is already a
fairly European perspective I would say
it's quite different than how we might
understand the rural in North America
but he sees it as this place of
industrial nostalgia seasonal migrations
places of Tax Incentive of
infrastructure production and and this
is sort of evident in some of the
drawings and maps I believe he's got an
exhibition imminently at the Guggenheim
on this that sorry not the Guggenheim
the Whitney and so you know this is one
of the many drawings that they're I
think working on where the rural and
again this is Holland work so where the
rural I think is very different than the
North American context it's hugely
infrastructure alized urbanized and
indeed tethered to cities but the the
rural is sort of understood as a kind of
extension of the city and for us the
rural is much more a kind of place of
where there's a specific cultures where
it's highly sort of place base I think
the rural and the remote ask interesting
questions about what is the role of the
local in an era of globalization and so
this is sort of where we are coming from
and so we've been running studios that
sort of preceded some of our own
research where we at least in the
context of Canada which has a lot of
rural and
even more remote areas just to
understand like how does one even decide
just define the rule so this is a map
documenting all the sort of sites of
inhabitation in Canada where every dot
represents I can't remember how many
thousands of people but one sees the
pattern pretty quickly that first of all
it's all happening close to the Canadian
US border and there are these sort of
different kinds of patterns of
inhabitation in the rural and remote so
you get edge conditions either in
Islands you get sort of rural linear
conditions which will happen along
rivers or along major roads and then you
get more of a kind of grid condition
that that where you get in habitation
sort of happening in a more spread out
way across the territory and so
geography of course plays a crucial role
and infrastructure plays a crucial role
in how the rural has developed so the
the next question for us is what are the
sort of spatial practices happening in
the rural and for us spacial practice is
partly taken from the feds idea of
spatial practice and the idea that that
that that sort of society shaped space
and reciprocally that space shaped
society and that there's a kind of
dialogue or dialect or a sort of
interrelationship between how we occupy
the territory or the city and how the
city in turn shapes our patterns of
movement our social practices etc and so
as I mean and hopefully some of this
will become clear through the projects
but as an example these are maps that
were made in Nunavut which is a are one
of our most northern territories in
Canada that was developed by the Inuit
as part of a land claims and they
basically mapped out every square
kilometer of the territory in terms of
where they hunted in the summer in the
winter and so they marked you know where
do we harvest arctic char where do we
hunt caribou etc and so the idea that
the territory is tied to cultural
practices food practices patterns of
migration rather than a kind
of abstract sort of set of landforms so
these are the kind of winter patterns
and of course summer and winter patterns
are very different and the interesting
thing is that then spatial practice also
becomes political it it was their way of
arguing that they rightfully should have
the land claims and and sovereignty over
that territory similarly these are in
another part of the Canadian north where
the Inuit were mapping all their routes
of boats and snowmobiles in summer and
winter along rivers and land-based
trails and so again there's a kind of
spatial practice that overlays onto the
territory even though it may leave no
permanent marks and so then the question
is is this term the sort of new
vernaculars and what new vernaculars
might emerge in this in this kind of
ever transforming rural and remote
territory and so in some ways this is us
sort of trying to project new topologies
and there's a long history and
architecture of projection this is we've
actually recently finished an essay that
sort of takes part of this drawing and
makes our own version of it but this is
Charles Jencks famous sort of map or
diagram if you will from 1971 called
architecture 2000 projection predictions
and methods where he's sort of
predicting where architecture will go in
1970 so he's tracing back a lineage over
50 years and projecting forward 40 years
on what what are the priorities that
architecture has had and will have in
the future and this idea of sort of
prediction I think is part of what
interests us in these contexts of the
rural and the remote where the the sort
of rules of engagement like what what
one should do and what building typology
might emerge is still is still evolving
and this idea of a sort of projection of
course is embodied in people like buck
Minister fuller and his work in the
world games which were a set of kind of
literally games of
operation that he would sort of play if
you will with students and people that
sort of worked with him where he was
thinking at the scale literally of the
globe so kind of at a at a planetary
scale which was pretty remarkable for
the time and he looked at sort of
resources and energy energy networks and
economic networks and was trying to kind
of project new forms of inhabitation new
patterns of inhabitation at a
territorial scale and then in a much
more local scale in terms of this
question of sort of projecting new local
vernaculars someone like Temple Grandin
who is a sort of well known autism
advocate but also animal rights advocate
developed as part of these studies these
these sort of infrastructures for
basically allowing animals to be led to
slaughter in a more humane way so it
wasn't about not slaughtering the
animals but it was about how what
infrastructure is what new types do we
need to imagine in this context for the
rural that would allow animals to go
through through the process of
slaughtering in a way that didn't create
the kind of anxiety and so they're
obviously radically different scales but
this question of projecting new typology
is whether the scale of the territory or
whether the kind of highly local scale
of on almost an animal pen in some ways
has driven a lot of our work so just
quickly before I get to the actual
projects a lot of our research we often
refer to as detective work in that it it
is it is research but it's also sort of
looking for threads and synergies
between sometimes seemingly incompatible
or or unrelated phenomena and so I one
part I was sort of reflecting on like
what what motivates us what drives us
and I would say that one is that we're
really interested in questions that
intertwine territory it
economy and typology whether it's
landscape type ologies infrastructure
topologies or building typology x' we
like to use research to uncover the
larger social cultural and economic
forces which shape spatial phenomena and
and I really think that until when
somehow draws or visualize things it's
very hard to fold in things that might
be outside the discipline and use them
to inform design so the the kind of
visualizing is a critical act we love to
search out the overlooked and that
definitely started here and to use
drawings to spatial eyes phenomena that
haven't yet been documented and we found
that the answer to some of these sort of
complex questions often doesn't lie in a
single solution but can be extrapolated
from a series of responses and so you'll
see that many of our projects work
through multiples that that are really
asking questions often more than
offering a definitive solution so I
wanted in homage to my our year here but
also because it's set I think a really
set up a sort of way of working that has
stayed with us I'm going to talk about a
project that we did here really only
just to set up the work method not the
details of the project so we had come
here and I think we told Rob Livesey we
were going to look at the phenomenology
of glass and then I drove through we
made our way to one of the shopping
malls and I went into slightly
anaphylactic shock because I've only
grown up in sort of downtown highly
urban cities and I just and I hadn't
really spent much time in in a lot of
North America really and I just we
discovered these sort of exurban retail
strips and the parking lots and the big
boxes and I've sort of both horrified
and fascinated and I told Mason forget
glass we've got to look at this and Rob
very kindly let us switch switch our
proposals so as I say this kind of
landscape that was hopping
and being produced clearly with very
little architectural or let very little
input from architects and was being
written about by urban theorists but
designers at the time were not yet
really looking at this and so we spent
the first term and a half here really
just doing this kind of broad research
understanding you know how the land is
defined by economically understanding
the kind of language like the idea of
the power center the roll out the idea
of Spade culture of spending to save we
got fascinated by all sorts of what I
still consider weird but wonderful
practices like tailgating and
boondocking in Walmart parking lots and
and it was really just to kind of
understand the forces economic political
and spatial that were shaping and
logistical they were shaping this
environment and we ended up developing
nine highly schematic projects three
that looked at this question through the
lens of landscape in ecology three that
looked at it through the lens of parking
and mobility and three that looked at it
in terms of the potential for greater
programmatic cross-pollination and we
called it flat space because there was
the sense that everything got flattened
in this environment of the retail like
serving corridors because everything was
sort of reduced to its minimal function
so these at first we did not produce
these drawings at the during the time of
our Lefevre I wish we had these were
produced for an exhibition two years
later where we're invited to kind of
contribute our work that we had
developed here so I'm not gonna get into
the projects but this idea of the
multiple and of running projects a bit
like science experiments so we said what
happens if we just let landscape drive
the question what happens if we just let
mobility drive the question what happens
if we just let program it sort of
allowed us to kind of work quickly
through a range of questions and then
these were some of the second edition
models that we had developed for this
exhibition
so this interest in in kind of the
overlooked in starting with research and
in the multiple you will see reappear
throughout most of the projects that
show so I'm going to show four projects
if timing cooperates with me one that is
a research book project and then three
design research projects so the first is
many North's which is a book we came out
with in 2014 that 2017 excuse me that
that in a way consolidated many years of
research that had run in parallel to
design projects that we were developing
looking at the north so for a little bit
of context this is Canada we're just
north of you we worry a lot that you
don't know we exist but we're there and
even more remote than southern Canada is
northern Canada and there are I would
say now about a hundred and twenty
thousand people so twice the OSU campus
spread out over three million square
kilometers the largest two capital
cities you see there black dots there
two black dots are about twenty thousand
and after that you get into communities
of to three thousand sometimes a few
hundred so the challenges of a kind of
radically dispersed set of communities
raise this question in terms of how you
provide services how you build the
logistics of inhabitation etc and so one
of the things that interests us you know
we realize most of us in most Canadians
and even sort of understand the north as
we see it in National Geographic the
polar bears the sort of infinite
expenses but in fact there are people
living there and they're they're sort of
we love this photo this is a
photographer friend of ours because it
kind of captures the sort of challenges
of inhabitation the reality that you're
you're tethered by infrastructure but
always
sort of in the fragility of the kind of
fairly dramatic climate and geography of
the place and one of the things about
the Canadian north is that we've largely
imported southern models of Education of
housing of infrastructure so you see
here these kind of bungalows this is in
Rankin Inlet which is a community of
about 3000 and Nunavut and and and one
sees the sort of you know local
adaptations but this this fundamentally
this sort of suburban model that has
been deployed across most of northern
Canada and you also start to see there's
there's a strong legacy of kind of
military camps and so forth and when
sees it in the planning or the lack of
planning where there's a sense that
buildings have largely fallen from the
sky and there's been very little thought
about the rural design could play we've
always loved this photo this is of three
Inuit youth in the 70s in front of a
building by one of our really
interesting architecture did these kind
of weird space like buildings throughout
Nunavut but it speaks to this kind of
conflation of modernity and tradition
these sort of Inuit youth that are
dressed in the kind of hip clothes of
the day on this kind of landscape on
which this building is sort of seemingly
fallen even though I think it's kind of
cool building but it's got a problematic
relationship to landscape and one of the
things to note is that the North even
though it's tiny communities is growing
really quickly they have high birthrates
they have children young the economy is
booming in many places because of mining
etc so per capita they're actually the
fastest part of many of the fastest
growing regions in Canada and so you
have these Inuit youth that are sort of
negotiating contemporary culture they're
listening to hip-hop they're on Facebook
but then also going out hunting with
their elders and this this sort of
collision of tradition and culture is
remarkable and and the culture has been
very adaptable and I would say that
architecture has not and this is part of
what has fascinated us
so the first question for us was how do
we define the north you can define it by
what we call the Canadian Northern
Territories you can define it by the
task force line the point beyond which
you get sort of tax benefits for living
in a rugged condition you can define it
by ethnographic regions where certain
indigenous groups live you can define it
by the treeline where where the there
are no tree on the point beyond which
there are no trees you can define it by
the point of continuous permafrost which
is basically the point at which the land
is permanently frozen or was until
climate change kicked in the you know
you can define it by eco zones you can
define it by where the roads cease -
there are no more roads which has huge
impacts on how you build how you move
etc you can define it there's a famous
geographer who looked at the north and
talked about middle North far north and
extreme north according to a set of
criteria that he had developed and so
you start to realize there are many
North's hence the title of the book that
and that basically depending on what
you're looking at I would say in any
project not specifically the North that
you know you can be looking at a project
in Ohio and if you're looking at
watershed you will have one boundary if
you're looking at urbanization you will
have another set of boundaries and so
this idea of the map defining the the
kind of territory that is relevant has
been really interesting to us so we came
out with this book and I'll try and talk
you through a few case study so this was
the structure of the book we looked at
urbanism we looked at architecture but
we also looked at questions of mobility
of monitoring both military and research
monitoring of resources because we
realized that all these things were in
some way shaping the North far more than
buildings buildings were actually almost
the byproduct rather than the the thing
driving the physical environment so each
chapter began with a timeline that was
there really to kind of introduce
someone unfamiliar
with the context what were the you know
what were the policies that had been
enacted in relation to housing or
urbanism what innovations had happened
so it was really a kind of overview and
then the book has a set of interviews
with northerners and northern scholars
it has a set of essays that we authored
but in some ways the crux of or one of
the kind of key components of the book
is a set of case studies for each
chapter so they're typically five or six
case studies so I'm gonna take you
through three or four just to give you a
sense and the case studies are really
partly interested in a kind of multi
scalar analysis so how do you understand
a phenomena at a regional scale and then
at a highly local scale it's interested
in the kind of temporal realities
because of course in the north
you know summer and winter change
radically water becomes frozen land in
the winter movement changes so
seasonality is sort of unavoidable which
is very different than in the south you
know we we only realize we have weather
when you know there's a snowstorm in our
airports close down but most of the time
we sort of operate in differently to
climates so the first phenomena is is
the phenomena of snow fences which is a
uniquely northern innovation which is
basically that there are no trees in
much of the Canadian north and so these
are basically an artificial forest it is
a fence that is built outside of town so
you see the little blue lone lines on
some of the city communities that have
them and they basically are designed
because the wind because there's no
trees can move rapidly across the
territory and dumps huge amounts of snow
right on the town and on the buildings
and so the snow fence basically acts as
a sort of line of defense to force the
snow to fall before it hits the
community so it acts like a kind of
shelterbelts in a way a man-made one and
they're kind of these beautiful
structures in the landscape
you know that that have really become a
kind of northern vernacular another
example taken from the mobility chapter
is looking at the phenomena of Steel if
so much of the north in Canada there are
no Road so the only way you get things
to communities is by boat in the summer
or by Road in the winter I mean by plane
the rest of the time and so we began by
just tracking where shipping was
happening from of course and and and
it's in these kind of large-scale maps
that when realizes that the north is so
intensely tethered to the South when you
make a map of health you know all lines
lead south when you make a map of
military surveillance all lines lead
south so there's this kind of weird
dichotomy between a kind of sovereign
north and then it's sort of imposed
dependence on the south so this is just
sort of showing the Sealift routes they
happen usually once a year or twice a
year so if you want your IKEA sofa you
wait you put in your order in April you
get it in September and if you miss that
shipment you wait another year and the
same thing if you want a snowmobile if
you want a car if you want building
supplies so for building you know they
put they send up everything in one or
two C lips if you forget some lumber
it's a very expensive plane ride of
lumber up to the nurse so hit it has
huge impacts on a whole host of things
and so the cela pheasants say happens a
couple of times a year these cargo ships
travel the north most communities don't
have proper loading docks or ports and
so the boat has two more in the bay and
then a smaller boat has to go back and
forth negotiating the tides for four
days excuse me to deliver the sea pens
and what's interesting is that also the
sea Ken's then often get left in
communities and re-appropriated as kind
of workshops and storage and so they
become part of the urban landscape
another example from monitoring at a
kind of much larger scale is the dew
line which is a distance early warning
stations that were built by the
Americans across the Canadian North the
Alaska and Greenland and so some of you
may have seen maps like this it's
basically they built 63 stations across
the circumpolar world it was the biggest
construction project ever undertaken
almost in the history of humankind it
was a massive project but when what one
realizes is these dots are places and
they often started sowed the seeds of
new communities they developed very
specific building types that were that
also sowed the seeds of a kind of legacy
of prefabrication and kind of repeatable
building types so these are some of
these kind of building trains that they
would ship up and assemble they became
these kind of crazy things in the
landscape most are no longer in use many
have been dismantled a few are in kind
of operation but they're no longer
manned but some of these had like 68 to
100 people living year-round they had
libraries and cinemas I mean there was I
mean I think it was a pretty you know
isolating way of life but but there were
there was a kind of whole social culture
to these places and this is them now
today and and there's huge issues of
kind of remediating the land once
they've been removed in terms of kind of
indigenous practices that are that are
very different they did not leave marks
so unlike some of the the earlier
precedent we we worked with an
anthropologist who had worked with
elders in Nunavut to document the
traditional trails that Inuit use and we
this is basically us leveraging his
research he spent 10 years doing this
but we also tried to kind of visualize
how the Inuit navigate through the land
so they're amazing waitwe finders they
can travel with no signage no apps
and they can they can tell you exactly
how to get to a certain place and they
use landform and ridges as ways of
navigating they famously have like ten
terms for snow so we wanted to kind of
visualize and the materiality of the
Inuit terms for snow we looked at what
they pack when they go out on the land
what are the tools and equipment and so
this idea that that kind of something
like moving on the land is both at a
territorial scale but then at the kind
of hyper local scale of packing a sled
first was interesting and then the last
case study I'll show is looking this is
from the resources chapter looking at
one form of country food harvesting
country food is basically the local food
so caribou arctic char etc so there's a
practice in northern Quebec of
harvesting mussels they have some of the
richest largest mush mussels not our
mussels seafood mussels and so they go
out onto the ice in the winter and
harvest them and so what they do is they
make a hole in the ice they take their
sled and use it as a ladder and I should
so what I need to explain is these are
some of the highest tides in the world
so there are 40-foot tides and so what
they do is they wait till the tides have
receded and you basically get a space 30
feet under the ice in which to harvest
the the mussels so they're going down
under the ice sea bed and then their
elders that stay on top to kind of warn
them if the tides are coming back in and
this is us basically trying to kind of
visualize the architecture of the
landscape that you get this kind of
frozen roof and then this kind of liquid
under space that gets emptied as the
tides and so these are some of the
calendars that we would typically make
where we're both tracking kind of over a
year when the harvesting happens but
then also on a daily basis this kind of
tidal cycles and this is a this is not
our photo but a grandfather and his
grandson under the sea ice caves
collecting them the mussels so one might
say you know what does one do with all
of this and many times we don't know but
I think it's it's a they're sort of
fascinating stories they speak to the
way the land is inhabited and part of
our argument with the book was to say
especially in context were unfamiliar
with you need to look really closely and
you look neat to look at things
differently and you need to expand the
things that you look at to be able to
kind of produce a culturally meaningful
architecture if one just looked at
building form I think we we would
continue to repeat many of the mistakes
we've made in the north today and then
the end of the book there's this sort of
tech matrix which was our sort of
technical footnotes where we basically
included every tool that we talked about
in the in the book and so in some ways
we were equated you know a building a
hunting knife a rifle and a snowmobile
as all basically technologies that allow
in habitation in this environment and
that architecture is no different than
anything else so the next project I'm
going to show it's called making camp
and it dealt with architectures
relationship to environment albeit in a
perhaps less dramatic environment this
was produced for the Chicago Biennale in
2015 and it began we've we've had a long
interest in in this question of
architectures relationship to
environment and the Salton Sea project
was one of the ones that started this
but one of the things we were fascinated
with is is that in sort of description
of the production of environment in the
book the architecture of the well
temperate environment and he talks about
two ways that we have to kind of produce
environment one is the logic of the tent
where you keep out climate you keep out
the rain or you keep out the cold or the
bugs or whatever it might be and the
other is the logic of the campfire which
produces environment by producing a kind
of space of comfort that attracts people
to it
and and and then you have the phenomenon
of sort of the places of comfort in the
places of discomfort when you're in the
kind of tailwind of the of the campfire
but there are two sort of fundamentally
different ways about thinking how we
engage environment and so as we're
thinking about this project we realize
there's been a lot of innovations on
tents we have perfected the art of tent
and so we said you know we're not gonna
spend our time trying to make it better
tent
industrial designers will undoubtedly do
a better job for us that us but one of
the things that that interested us about
the tent is in some ways it is kind of
the primitive Hut it basically asked
what is the the most minimal structure
you need to exist in some level of
comfort in the environment and so this
is this was definitely a kind of
something that that interested us on the
flip side so if we've innovated on the
camp the tent we have not been very
innovative with the campsite and we
started to kind of look at existing maps
of campsites and then started to draw
others that we found and we realized
they basically replicate suburban
cul-de-sacs
just you know with with a little less
infrastructure and so I'm I'm Canadian
and normally you need to go camping to
maintain your Canadian passport but I
had never been camping and so Mason one
year said we've got a we got to go and
so I pictured we'd be in the wilderness
and it would be so romantic and at least
in many Toronto area campsites you show
up and this is what you get you get huge
families doing like Indian cookouts and
Chinese you know hot pots and it's kind
of wonderful I mean it's actually
totally wonderful but it is not really
about a retreat into nature as one might
imagine and people you know sleep in
their RVs and you know have their cars
next to them and so
we were interested in the idea that
tamping is has become a largely
collective enterprise but and how could
we celebrate that but on the other hand
reintroduce this kind of immersive
relationship to the landscape so we
started you know as we do with many of
our projects began with some general
research on like what is the history of
tamping what is one of the legislation's
that have enabled this what are the
social transformations like the rise of
recreational culture the rise of the
vehicle as a means to be able to get out
into the landscape etc and then we also
looked at camping gear so all the things
that enable us to camp glamp
etc and we got fascinated also with you
know there there's a whole subculture of
people that are really into their
camping gear and they will post on
Facebook and other places like how to
pack the perfect tonight I think I found
what and and so this question of like
Ken what could one shed some of this
gear also they could one imagined
communal infrastructures where you
wouldn't need to bring as much where it
would almost be built into the
infrastructure so so we developed this
this sort of set of again five projects
that looked at various sort of imagined
landscape conditions so one was water
one was kind of cold climate tundra one
was forested etc and we produced this
this sort of mod is sort of large model
that conflated these very different
landscapes into a you know into an
impossible condition so we didn't
imagine them happening with this level
of proximity but here are the the sort
of five landscapes and projects so I'm
going to show you just three of them the
first one and we we we really like the
model as a device especially for things
like bein alleys because they're sort of
visceral and people can kind of
understand them and
or maybe more immediate than sometimes
drawings although everyone asked us what
are those sticks in your model and I was
like they're trees like it just seems so
obvious but no one this was a clearly an
architectural assumption of how to
represent trees so these and and one of
the things you'll see is we wanted to
kind of show these new infrastructures
inhabited and we spent a lot of time
thinking about the kind of stakeholders
of this campsite so you have you know
people you have canoers you have caribou
you have foxes I think there's some wild
bunny rabbits in there and so the idea
is that it's not just a human landscape
but it is a kind of ecology that is at
least navigating around these
infrastructures so the first project was
called closed loop and it it asked you
know could one occupied wetlands and
lakes which are of course normally you I
mean one of the things about companies
they're pretty standard conditions of
flat ground not too many trees so you
can pitch a tent etc and pull up your
car so this was the idea that you would
leave your car and be able to walk to
this sort of communal floating
infrastructure that could occupy the
wetlands and lakes and the reason what's
called closed loop was the idea that of
course if you're in a wetland you can't
just dispose of your you know dirty
water and so forth into the lake and so
the idea was that you would it would act
as a kind of processing machine for you
you could collect water but you could
also dispose of the water and move it
through these artificial wetlands before
it was released back into the kind of
larger landscape and it also let's see
oh there we go so it also in this this
idea of collectivity there were sort of
collective campfires there was the water
point which is crucial in all campsites
and then the tents were imagined as a
set of kind of curtains if they were not
in use they would be kind of up and and
if they were in use you were basically
kind of tethering them down so that's
how you would know which campsites were
free and we developed for each campsite
a kind of manual as you get in most
national and provincial and state
ARC's that told you what to bring and
you know where to go and how to use
these imaginary campsites and then this
is a model of of the closed-loop project
and there's this is a sort of imagining
you know being able to arrive at it by
canoe and these are the kind of
artificial wetlands that became built
into the kind of infrastructure of the
of the collective campsite this project
was looking at sort of how one might
occupy kind of forests and how one might
be actually in the trees as rather as
versus being only on the ground and it
played off the kind of existing
innovation which is you may have seen
these tents that you can tether between
two trees but they're always single
single tents and so we start to wonder
could one imagine a sorry
collective platform see the point where
where these were tents these were the
places where you could walk and then
there were a set of kind of column
structures that were the stairs that
would or ladders I should say that would
get you up so again the kind of manual
this was one of these suspended
infrastructures that would tether to the
different trees and that would really
allow you to kind of be in the tree
canopy rather than below it and this is
one of these suspended ladders that you
would climb up to get on and the idea
was that the tents would deploy they
were kind of built-in to the collective
structure and you could deploy them and
then the last one that I'll show from
this series was called the lookout tower
and he was interested in this idea of
instead of the campsites being deployed
horizontally could you start to stack
them vertically and again sort of build
in some of the infrastructure so the
tents were actually almost like
umbrellas you could kind of pull them
out and so each surface became one
person's campground and then the kind of
ground became the shared infrastructure
so you could you know make your fire
store I think here we were storing gear
here you would get water and so forth
so again the kind of instruction manual
the model sort of and again kind of
allowing a radically different
relationship to the landscape than one
normally can have and here is this tower
with this kind of filigree of netting
that would prevent people in theory from
falling off and then the kind of
lower-level infrastructure so again and
then and then there were others that
looked at kind of cold climate camping
and one that looked at sort of being
off-grid so kind of plugging into
technology and so forth and so the the
projects were I mean interestingly
enough it got featured on CBC Radio and
Parks Canada called this up and they
were like this is exactly what we've
been thinking about and I have to say
and we should then the projects and I
was pretty sure they were gonna think we
were nuts but they did not and at one
point it looked like they might actually
take on one of these and then it got
lost in bureaucratic red tape as things
happen tend to do but but it was really
a kind of way about you know thinking
through ways of engaging the environment
in new ways so the next project that I'm
going to show is a pretty recent one
that's looking at rural Newfoundland and
which is so let me I I suddenly realize
many of you right most Canadians don't
know where Newfoundland is so you would
you would be forgiven for not known so
it is a maritime province it's kind of
like our Maine and it has a that that
wasn't meant in any way like insult I
mean that was
that really wasn't insulting so it's
it's it's our easternmost province it
only joins Canada in 1949 after the
Second World War so it has a very
distinct culture it belongs actually to
the United Kingdom before and it shares
many of the issues of the Canadian north
of small distributed fishing communities
with the radical difference that unlike
the north which is rapidly growing
Newfoundland is rapidly shrinking and
dramatically so so it has this kind of
amazing geography it has these the the
the names of their geographies are like
tickle and Inlet and you know loves code
they have amazing geographical names and
a very distinct kind of building
typology which I'll speak about and an
amazing kind of coastal condition which
is what produced an incredibly rich
fishing culture and it was people
described you know but you know 200
years ago you could put your hand in the
water and like just harvest the fish by
hand like it was just overflowing but of
course is we are prone to do as humans
we so and so you had these literally
thousands of little fishing villages
they were almost kind of subsistence
living but this kind of lovely
relationship to the landscape you had
almost no roads and infrastructure so in
again in some ways similar to the north
and then in 1992 they realized they were
the fish had basically all died off they
had been so dramatically over fished
that they created what was called the
cod moratorium and when you go to
Newfoundland every you know it's a bit
like before and after Christ but there
it's before and after the cod moratorium
like literally the whole province
stopped and it and I've never kind of
seen a place where where the entire
economy just collapsed with that
legislation and so now you have this
province with
so the exes are towns that have
literally are now defunct the red are
tons that are rapidly shrinking and on
their way to to disappearing and the
blue are the few places that are growing
that are largely regional service
centers and so we got interested so
Newfoundland has a long history of kind
of boom and bust so originally it was
the fishing industry then in the 80s as
the cod moratorium was beginning they
discovered oil and they started to
extract oil off the coast of
Newfoundland when in 2014 when that
started to crash you know yet again the
economy started to collapse and so it
has had this history of like reliance on
single economies to drive everything and
we got interested in on the one hand
tracking these these many busts so the
blue is the kind of fishing red is the
kind of a pink story the fuchsia is the
kind of history of mining which also
kind of basically collapsed shipbuilding
of course collapsed with the end of the
fishing the beiges pulp and paper so
this there's this kind of long history
of things collapsing and so it became
and you also get these these crazy
conditions of these lovely little
buildings and then these are the the
icebergs of Greenland that are calving
off and that our sailing past
Newfoundland and have produced this
entire tourist industry where thousands
of people go to watch the icebergs sail
by and so tourism has become a major
economy so we first wanted to kind of
look at the kind of byproducts of this
boom and bust economy and so you know
defunct fishing plants defunct pulp and
paper mills etc and and for the purposes
so this was developed for the Oslo tree
nolle this past year
and we tracked nine of these stories and
I'm not really going to go into I'll
tell you about one or two very quickly
so this is one so when they join
Confederation the the Premier er the
head of Newfoundland wanted to modernize
and was like we are gonna build the
economy and so they you know would build
things like rubber factories and they
would invest millions of dollars and
then two years later it would go bust
because they realized they didn't know
how to run a rubber factory they were
producing terrible rubber and and then
you ended up with these dozens and
dozens of in Dutch industrial buildings
that had actually you know never really
got off the ground another one this is
kind of crazy they decided to build a
cucumber farm and again invested
millions and millions of dollars but
then discovered Newfoundlanders don't
eat vegetables and so they ended up
selling the cucumbers to feed the cows
at $27 a cucumber and that was the end
of that and so there's this kind of
history of like and and we've gone and
done community consultations and you
know one community was like we should
build a prison that'll build the economy
we should get cruise ships and you're
like these are terrible ideas and so in
some ways our project was you know what
would it well sorry so this is these are
sorry these are some of the vernaculars
these kind of houses and structures for
drying fish historically and fences so
these were these are still part of the
kind of local landscape and so yet again
we decide we develop nine projects that
looked at kind of what a steady state
economy might resemble or what an
architecture of a steady state or even
shrinking economy might look like and so
we partly in the spirit of economy made
all our models out of paper partly
because biennales give terrible funding
and so we thought what's the cheapest
latest thing we can make these models of
so we developed these sort of nine
projects that speak two different ways
to kind of imagine alternative economies
so I'm going to show you three or four
quickly just to kind of give you a sense
this was one called
live work stage so stage was
traditionally where you spew dried fish
and they were these structures out into
the water but here we wondered you know
could you have a
you know classrooms could you have a
library because they're dismantling all
their libraries could you have a kind of
skills based learning that would form a
kind of community center by the water
and would kind of renews some of the
sort of local vernaculars this was one
called the live work stage where we were
interested in in kind of the long
history of you know basically living and
working in because all the fishermen
would basically work out of their houses
but now imagining kind of new economy so
garages and there's quite a kind of
tradition of making and hands-on skills
that remains and so imagining now
instead of individual buildings that
kind of cluster of houses they would
have relationships to the water but also
communal surfaces for for working and
making this oh sorry this is the live
work the this is the stage of my
drawings our slate at a border and this
is another view of it and so these are
these kind of really simple structures
but now they would have been houses
historically that are now kind of
oversized and take on these new rules of
Education library knowledge sharing etc
this was one called the garden defences
there's a long history of kind of local
agriculture that had been lost and so we
were interested in in kind of test beds
for agriculture because it's a place
that imports all its food and and in
many of the more remote communities it's
very hard to get fresh produce and yet
there's a kind of knowledge base that's
been lost and so the idea was you know
could you have farm buildings sort of
test beds where you could do experiments
and new methods of growing and the
was the kind of attendant model with
these sort of a kind of farm laboratory
to rekindle this kind of knowledge base
and then the last one that I'll show we
called the material Salvage so you have
all these buildings that are kind of
being dismantled and rather than always
going to Home Depot the idea was could
you kind of salvage some of these you
know old doors old windows old wood some
of which is quite well made and and
basically kind of imagine a local home
depot but just of used materials where
people could come and bring old things
and then trade or exchange and so it was
really sort of asking you know if one
were to radically imagine the economy
not as depending on on growth and
expansion and consumption but more of
kind of trading and sharing and almost
the kind of return to subsistence or a
kind of modern version of it what might
that look like and what might the
building types emerge that they kind of
respond to those needs so these are some
of the others I'm going to I'm gonna
skip this was one looking at moose
management they have a huge moose
problem and this is the the collection
and and they were the the models were
kind of playing off the sort of
vernacular of these buildings on stilts
in the water how am i doing for time
shai five means okay well basically last
one um and I have a kind of PostScript
um so this was a we tend to do a lot of
beam Ollie's and after every one we say
we're never doing another one and then
we keep doing them and I can tell you
it's not a good retirement plan but they
are fun to do so this was done for the
sole Biennale in 2017 and this is what I
would maybe call more more about a kind
of peri-urban it's not really about the
role in remote but it's what's happening
in the kind of hinterlands and it was
called states of disassembly territory
toxicity and electronics so so we were
invited by the curators of the Soviet
Ally to develop a project
and the title of the Biennale was called
eminent Commons and and they sort of
identified the traditional Commons of
air water fire earth the things we all
share but then they sort of expanded
their their terms to include sensing
communicating moving making and
recycling and so they asked us you know
what did we want to work on and we said
recycling and then we didn't think much
more about it and then we had to develop
a project and we thought well we're in
Seoul the kind of center of electronic
production let's look at the kind of
whole economy and cycles of electronic
waste which is the one thing we most of
us don't know much about we certainly
didn't and so this is an interesting
quote by Jennifer Garber's who wrote a
book called the digital rubbish she
writes the digital revolution as it
turns out is littered with rubbish and
so we you know we all think we're going
paperless but first of all we know a we
print out more than we ever did but
second of all we produce a lot of
equipment phones computers etc that
basically we have no real means right
now of recycling in proper manner and so
you you get what's kind of known as a
sort of form of toxic colonialism where
developed nations don't want to take the
time and invest in the proper recycling
of it of these of this electronic waste
which is filled with toxic metals and so
we send it to you know Africa China
Pakistan to to offload our problem and
what's interesting is there's whole kind
of economies and and an urban isms
emerging around this toxic colonialism
so this is in a bowl oshi which is in
Ghana and you know there's a mosque
there's a church there's a football
patch so you realize there's like a
whole kind of community emerging around
the kind of
recycling of waste and it's all of
course done manually in a highly toxic
manner because it's uncontrolled or
unregulated I should say so we set out
first to kind of understand what
constitutes e-waste and it's not just
your phone and your computer it's your
fridge it's your microwave everything
that has a kind of computer part
basically has at least some component of
e-waste so we we wanted to kind of
understand some of the metals and things
that are that are problematic in the
e-waste cycle and then we set out to
kind of understand the global chain of
where things are extracted which is the
blue and where things are disposed of
which is the the kind of pink networks
so there are rare earths that are being
extracted and then being just being
disposed of as once they become a waste
in various countries and there's you
know huge companies that are of course
participating in this kind of economy
and what one realizes is you know you
extract the rare earth in one place it's
manufactured in China it's packaged in
Holland and then we buy it in you know
Columbus Ohio so that computer has
traveled a lot of it has acquired a lot
of air miles by the time we get it and
so this drawing was was that it kind of
maybe more tangible scale collapsing a
bit like the making camp many landscapes
that are all tied to the production of
e-waste so the mines where we extract
things the smelters where we refine
things the the kind of toxic colonialism
of kind of hand dismantling some of this
e waste and then I think this one was
was an example in Seoul where it's
actually done it's one of the few
property waste recycling facilities so
trying to kind of understand their their
kind of building and landscape realities
and scales
so we we got interest in this idea of
like disassembly and so we went to an
old warehouse that's sold all the
computers we bought a bunch of computers
and we disassembled them and we took
hard drives and fans and cooling coils
and thought this is going to be part of
the architecture of our response and
then the other component of it was
thinking about the actual building types
so this is these computer parts now kind
of neutralized through the the kind of
whiting out of them and we started to
imagine them as as I say as part of the
kind of architecture of these things so
we again I think we'd like to make work
for ourselves and develop seven projects
they were each looking at different type
ologies that might emerge in this kind
of new economy of e-waste if we were
actually to kind of look after it on our
own soil rather than ship it off and so
it was looking at sort of e-waste
markets a waste processing and kind of
better recycling practices
it's theaters where you could kind of
celebrate the kind of culture of hacking
etcetera so these were the seven models
that they both had you know deliberate
building types the kind of vault tower
the kind of market space the the kind of
manufacturing building but then
incorporated these sort of various
computer parts into it so I'm going to
tell you about maybe three of them again
just to give you a kind of taste this
this one was called exchange campus and
we imagined it situated at ports where a
lot of the e-waste is typically sent you
know sent off to other countries and
imagining a kind of campus where a the
waste would be triaged and properly
sorted but where you could actually
develop educational programs where one
might actually think about repurposing
reusing materials how could parts be you
know what new technologies might emerge
in the kind of Reaper
seeing of some of these technologies and
materials and so this was that there was
this kind of long spine that divided the
kind of more Campus side and then the
sort of triaging side and and and you
know so really imagined as a kind of
campus of buildings another one we
called the we market which was which was
a play in a way on the kind of best buy
where we said you know best buy we go
and buy all these new electronics could
one imagine a kind of Best Buy of where
you went and got parts for your computer
or parts for your phone or traded things
in so it was really a kind of maybe
glorified big box there was a kind of
conveyer belt that would bring things in
shipping and loading docks and then
points for public entrance and and
spaces where things were triaged in
other places where things were sold and
we had a lot of fun with these models
and then the last one I'll show was
called the theater of disassembly it's
sort of our favorite and it was looking
as I say the kind of rise of hacker
culture and you know the fact that we
you know we watched shows about hoarders
we watch world Wrestling why could one
not watch hackathons disassembling and
building up new robots and new computers
and so forth but celebrating this kind
of post-consumer economy and so we
imagined it as a set of you know five
theaters Mason had done some research
years ago on anatomical theaters and so
he finally got to leverage it I don't
know if you know what anatomical theater
groups are but in the Renaissance they
would bring out corpses in these kind of
amphitheaters and do dissections of
bodies at a time when you weren't
allowed to because it was considered
unchristian so these were our own
theaters of disassembly but now of
machines not corpses or a different kind
of corpse maybe and then this kind of on
the ground floor would be where we're
all the kind of material was sorted and
triaged and you and the public
kind of really occupy this elevated
plane where the theaters were so these
projects work you know they're clearly
not meant as literal solutions but
they're meant as kind of provocations
about what are the new building types
that might emerge and they all play off
phenomena that are kind of already
existing you know we have stores where
you can buy old material we have hacking
you know events and hacking camps for
kids so in some ways it's kind of
playing off what exists and and sort of
amplifying those things so maybe I'll
end with a very light project very
different in nature it's an instant that
we've done several public art
installations this one was done in
Montreal in 2015 it was about activating
kind of vacant spaces in the downtown in
the winter the call was about
visualizing or dealing with sound and
light as a way to kind of activate
winter spaces and we were interested in
kind of could you could you develop a
single simple cereal element that could
be repeatable
but produce kind of infinite difference
so we started to we somehow thought
about the seesaw is this kind of really
simple intuitive thing that everyone you
know of all ages knows how to use and
that you could deploy it in different
lengths and that at any given time it
would be changing depending on the use
and so there were three seesaws of
different lengths
they were activated by the user and so
they would light up and emit sounds and
we worked with a sound artist
so each seesaw was loaded with a
different sound and it started to form a
kind of collective urban instrument and
so it would visually change but also the
the kind of sound emitting would change
depending on which seesaws were active
so this was it installed with 30 C saws
this is it you know after a kind of
major snowstorm in Montreal it's been a
surprising hit it was recently in New
York we may down to the New York Times
and then they forgot to mention our name
and we were like our moment of glory and
they don't even mention us but but but
it it I think it speaks to a kind of
albeit a very different scale a kind of
interest in how one imagines the public
realm and how people can kind of and and
use and activity are catalysts for the
public realm so I'll show I'll end my
talk on this video
[Music]
so these are the kinda types of sounds
that they
would have met
[Music]
and the idea is that they you know this
is the logic of seriality they could be
they've been deployed in 40 cities and
so they can adapt to the site they can
and anytime they're they're slightly
different
[Music]
and these were
there's a collection of Instagram videos
that people made on these I think it's
coming up
and I have to say we weren't expecting
people to have so much fun but I think
this idea of I'm going to end there but
I think you know regardless of the scale
at which we're working or the seeming
perhaps seriousness of the topic engaged
I think this idea of kind of reimagining
the environment and and and kind of
maintaining an aspect of sort of play
and curiosity and invention is something
that we're interested in so I will end
it there sorry I went very long
[Applause]
