so I've heard a lot about this school
it's nice to be here finally you know I
see always people coming from this
school to New York or other places where
I am so it's nice and actually I have a
funny story because I've been here only
once and I was I was telling actually
today there was when I worked for Peter
Iseman in 92 we were sent with three
project architects to Columbus Ohio to
study film Z if you remember that
ancient software to get instructions
from the developer you know the guy who
actually and designed that software so
that was my only four days ever in
Columbus and it's a while ago so happy
to be back I think the first thing I
always start with because I saw these
posters of my head in the hallway which
is kind of embarrassing is of course
that we don't you know we architects we
don't work alone we have a dog in the
foreground very important she does
models and we have some other people who
work with us and hence the name of the
office architectonic so I always decided
that the office should not have my name
because obviously teams are important
and especially in architecture we
actually do nothing as a person alone
the other thing I'm struck me today as I
was told today that I'm usually you guys
get lectures from more theoretical
people and that finally they decided to
get some people who build something
which means we're not theoretical so we
very abstract about my theories so yeah
here we are the first thing I maybe want
to show a little bit is is what we do
kind of think of in the office just to
counter that argument this is a book
which came out with Princeton Press in
2006 and the idea of the book is that we
as an office believe in networks they're
not only in the way we work with other
people but also in a way we work in the
office so the idea
more to have a network of experts in the
office that everyone has their own input
and that we work that way but also that
we like to work with other people like
MIT Media Lab or we have some scientist
friends in Holland since I am originally
from Holland and that that's the way we
like to try and advance the way we think
about buildings and I like to talk a
little bit about that today the other
thing is maybe that our research and
this is this is interesting when you do
a book the editor of Princeton Press
actually noted that to me at some point
it's like you know it's interesting that
your work goes through fields of
research and as we were talking about
that it's actually very very true and I
think you know if you guys ever start an
office yourself you'll hopefully find
that as well as that you have focuses
which stretch over a longer time than
just one project so that's a few years
we really our first few years was
actually thinking about the theme which
is just mentioned confluence the first
few years we're really interested in how
architecture is inflected by urban
systems and vice versa
which we call the interface we did a lot
of urban studies but also a lot of
buildings which were kind of very
inflected or influenced by by cities and
iNSYS and city systems I think you know
the interesting thing of a city is that
it is a set of systems and then the next
thing we looked at was intelligence
services or what we call smart skins the
idea that a surface is no longer
two-dimensional but maybe two and a half
or three dimensional that you can occupy
it can have intelligence embedded
technologies and all kinds of
performances and then the last thing
which is sounds a bit more abstract is
armature and I'll talk a little bit
about that as well but armature is more
the kind of four dimensional version of
a smart skin so maybe a smart object
okay I have one big influence I think
it's always interesting to think about
those things or maybe two but one is
shielded
has written a lot and you could say
maybe he's a projective philosopher the
idea of philosophy issues you'll go back
in history you discuss ideas which were
before and then you kind of discuss the
old ideas again in a new way
he kind of was one of the first
philosophers who actually counteracted
that with an other idea is that you can
actually pose an idea in the future and
then philosophize towards it and one of
the things he wrote was this statement
which I really like
the first real challenge lies in the
statement and creation of problems the
right problems so not just a problem
with the right problem the second
challenge lies in the discovery of
genuine differences in kind and the
third in the apprehension of real time
as in real time as in immediate he wrote
this in 1988 this notion of the right
problem as discussed by shielded area
prioritizes concept development of a
problem-solving curiosity over absolute
knowledge and immediacy of her stasis
this investigative approach has been
redlined through the research and design
conducted over the last few years at
architect onyx the work can be described
as an open network and network of
projects linked through these three
fields of research armature surface and
interface these fields are not isolated
but rather create a synthesis of
interests that overlap and inform each
other and afford a rethinking
reinvestigating and regenerating of
architectural concepts the focus is not
on form but only performative not on
aesthetics but on intelligence surface
in the second half dimension is the
recording of behavioral processes in
surface inflections and transforms the
wall or the facade from a separative
device into a connective membrane a
smart skin admin whose cell names these
things things shapes specific to these
things shapes are their surface
registrations that strive for gradual
perfection an essential form becomes
recognizable through a method variation
what I'm doing today is basically
running you through what we do in the
office which goes from objects which is
this and the last project is an urban
design so it's kind of interesting to
see you know and that doesn't necessary
I mean that this is the first thing we
did in the urban design is this actually
came out to be open design so it's a
nonlinear time wise and nonlinear
process this was a light we designed for
a lighting design comfort company
obviously surface this is one of the
first buildings we built and that's also
when I decided was the idea of the book
was to actually do only a book after we
build some building so it ran in the
wild this building was interesting in
the sense that what you see here is this
was an existing warehouse of six stories
and rather than tearing the warehouse
down we decided to keep the warehouse
and to fold a 12 story building around
it and to think of the building code as
an idea of recoding so not so much
building code as a restriction or
something you have to fight or some
weird thing which is gonna make
everything impossible but you kind of
think of it as something really
interesting and obviously if you really
work really well you potentially could
get some things back out of it so
considering the game but the first thing
we discovered from the building code is
that actually these setback coats in New
York they're actually not based on a
setback code as in steps or the wedding
cake scenario but as you see in this
little tiny diagram I should use this
thing this tiny little diagram it was an
inclined plane and the end what we did
was use mathematics the idea of
mathematics in inflection and to inflect
this inclined plane on the straight
plane and vice versa which then gave us
kind of a rippled facade which would go
equally from the top to the bottom and
would kind of intersect with the
extruded volume of the existing building
so you see this little cutting device
here and then you do a building that's
where we are then and then the other
idea was to kind of create these folds
as you see here really as fold
so we after a long kind of investigating
moment we
had the glass folded in Barcelona the
mullions extruded in Hong Kong and the
whole thing was put together in Brooklyn
and then of course you have these very
brave people who hang out of windows and
put these huge things in place
the way we did that it's may be
interesting for you guys since you all
work in 3d software is that we design
everything in 3d
there's no measurements on these
drawings not in the sense of you know
this is this long in this high but it's
all work points
so basically XYZ coordinates in space
and those drawings 3d drawings were sent
to Barcelona and to Hong Kong and those
people actually made it truly drawings
so it's a quite an interesting way of
working and also what's maybe
interesting also if you cut out the
contractor so nothing to do with the
contract it goes straight to the
manufacturer and then the bottom of the
building I should probably go back one
the idea was also that this was at is
this famous three dimension so what it
does every time it hits a boundary like
here on the street it folds out and
comes back as a big glass wing where it
meets the building there's balconies
inserted and the glass folds in and on
the top it falls up and over as it sort
of dissolves in the sky you could say as
a glass building then the sections of
the the entry we constantly change these
are the extruded moyen so as you can see
all these millions have different angles
only five thank God and then that's the
wing as it started to occur so the other
thing we did is we kind of completely
separated the vertical and horizontal
mullions which made that verticals we
didn't steal helps because you can weld
it and that was attached to the building
so the glass is actually floating off of
these steel millions and literally
hanging down from the 8th floor to the
to the ground floor so on this level
here there's actually only kind of
roller connections so it's kind of
really flopping around this is a gallery
in the building and then the rest of
residential it's actually surface
Magazine was in there these are all the
residences we made the
open ball it's the building is built
mostly with passive solar energy lot of
renewable materials it's not completely
off the grid but it's very very low
using energy and then here you start to
see the folds as they negotiate what was
quite interesting in defaults eventually
and I didn't know this until we actually
build it is that you can literally look
down through the glass of your little
band facade into the neighbor's living
room which is quite funny it's kind of a
rustic building and then this is the top
so this is really where that penthouse
as I said comes up over and down and
it's the class kind of parapet and here
you can see that that steel really
carries all the the glass basically
there's no stretch in the facade all the
actual structure of the building has
held back so the concrete's or
cantilever ring up to here so the steel
was really just supporting the glass
itself and this is then on the top so
you can see that the glass is just
connected with little pins like the the
wing on the ground floor was as well
this is then an interior we we mostly
deliver this building in draw as wall
space which wasn't that raw I mean it
was finished surfaces but in New York
you can imagine we did this loft which
was about 3,500 square feet for one
person one guy 28 years old and then we
did a loft on the second floor which was
1600 square feet I think for a family
with one child so you know in New York
it's very very hard to predict anything
like who was going to have what so we
finished the spaces as surfaces but we
didn't put bedrooms in this space we did
for this this person who was a painter
and a photographer and we made basically
very simple just one spine which
connects the east to the west facade and
behind that our private spaces as you
for example this is the bedroom with a
bathroom there the wood is quite
interesting it's a it's a bog wood above
wood is an oak which has been in the
swamps and hence it gets that really
beautiful blonde and black pattern so
it's kind of a kind of a tree gone wrong
you could say
this is another building we just
finished it's a completely other market
it's in Philadelphia Philadelphia's much
more alternative than in New York it's a
different market at different people it
was also built in the Northern Liberties
Northern Liberties it's kind of one of
those industrial areas where artists are
to live gallery stark new restaurants
start so it's really great it's kind of
an alternative area and of course there
also you can still Park under your
building which probably can here to in
New York if you can park it's kind of
really special but here we had an area
under the building the little tiny dots
here at the feet of the building the
core of the building comes down and this
basically is the parking but we thought
was important that it became a park so
the the surface where you're parking on
is grass wheat and then grasp it can go
from this pattern all the way to grass
looking so you can very from here to
here in the pattern and the way we did
that is that we actually only had the
building standing on the ground on one
side so this is the only level where as
kind of zero then it folds up to plus
one and the parking lot goes from zero
to minus one so this kind of a slip
between the two which then kind of gives
this very spacious area the area it was
building is very small scale so we
decided to build the building from set
of eltz interlocking else so that kind
of started to fit more in the building
it's in the in the whole region in the
whole area it's on the corner as you can
see here a lot of people were calling
this already a skate ramp just had a
perfect curve and then the other curve
has to be found where the building meets
the parking so it's actually right there
where you go under the building its
building concrete's like I'm just
actually in this school I was just
noticing today all the beautiful
cantilevers you have well that is nice
because you know if you pour concrete
there you go you have these huge
cantilever this is up on top of the
penthouse you get interesting cuts of
the city this is actually a city center
of Philadelphia as you look out over it
and then this is the front
the building hits the ground this is the
facade looking down the whole building
is built in a local bond I don't know
what you guys know that it's an
insulated aluminum panel is it's that's
why you can actually bend it and it's
very very flexible because there's two
skins with extruded foam in between and
then we use the size of the panel to
make exactly the line of the windows
also so it's kind of feels like a
modular system then the same owner next
hour is called the Q Tower this is a
tower where we work together with MIT
Media Lab I was really interested in
making a tower which would become more
robotic or you know you we talk a lot
about interactive spaces I was quite
interested in turning turning that
interactivity into something more maybe
more with your computer starts to do
also it's like basically like a software
it starts to learn your behavior rather
than the other way around and what we
looked at with selca from the MIT Media
Lab is how you take all these known
technologies as we all know them right
from smart passes for parkings to
sensors for lighting sensors for us
which sense the Sun and starts put
blinds down and to create and Link all
these technologies to a system which
would then ultimately get more advanced
so you were running through some of
those and then for the tower what we in
the meantime had discovered when we
build the American loft is what was
quite interesting about the facade there
is that while we were pouring the
concrete all those facade elements were
made while we did that so when we were
done pouring the concrete for the
building three weeks later the facade
was up so we thought that was quite an
interesting thought and then the next
thought was if you build the tower why
couldn't you everyone have a different
house like building villas in a tower
and it's repetition really that
important if you have the possibility to
put these results in parametric
software's where you could actually all
have your own individual apartment so
what we did is we set this provides a
very simple set of algorithms you see
here which were simple rule-based
systems which would define a freedom
where you could start to rate each
opening in the building relative to the
function and then give it deviations and
restrictions and how they would start to
negotiate each other and what happened
ultimately is that it was possible to
kind of create different windows to
different spaces but still the main
premise would be that every space
including bathrooms and kitchens would
have windows the other one was what I
thought it was probably my Dutch
background is that I always think it's
kind of weird to hear only have
penthouses on the top I personally don't
like being on the top I like being on
the second floor so what about if I ever
got money I would have to live in a
small apartment because every tower is
built with small apartments on the
second floor and then they get bigger to
the top so I convinced the owner to do
five penthouses two on the top and three
distributed through the building so that
eventually like if you wanted to have a
nice big duplex but on the fifth floor
or on the eighth floor it would be
possible so this kind of worked itself
into this this little tower it's very
very small site it's literally the site
of a plot in a normal even environment
so I think it's about 25 by 100 feet and
this is the parametric software I
started put it in it's the the limited
version of Katia Frank Gehry's office
the digital project you probably use it
here and that made that we could make a
quite random design we made in the
beginning we started to see similarities
and we found families of components
which could then be repeated and
basically you sometimes mirrored and
through that you could have a complete
random system but still not have you
know six thousand different molds to
make the research is some technical
things from the ground floor we had a
restaurant and what we did with this is
we went half a floor up so that if you
go half a floor up here in the
restaurant and there parking behind the
the inhabitants have their own entrance
from the other side I think you don't
see it here but this is basically the
restaurant here this model we have our
models made in Singapore they have great
inhabitants I'll show you them like here
are these people they also only have
sports cars really great and we have
Superman also living here thank you and
there was a glued really strongly so I
couldn't get them out so we decided to
just give it to the owner I think
they're still in no one really noticed
but a very you know polished looking so
yeah so then we got interested in
amateurs the person who I just mentioned
equity to sell you might not know him
he's a philosopher in mathematics 1937
he wrote a little book called the Arad
the origin of geometry and he wrote
something on for anomic shapes and for
anomic shapes to me are very interesting
because they are not only
three-dimensional more interesting maybe
more biologically formed organic spaces
but he sees them as spaces which
potentially have the capacity to create
other spaces and to me this body we
should see you know from which new
constructions grow so the idea that you
make something which ultimately can
generate something else we're very
interested in and actually forgot to put
one house in there which it's kind of a
more intense example of this but if you
buy the book you can find that but I'll
show a bigger example
here where we started to think of the
the whole interior of the in this case
hotel as a really intense not at space
this is again on the building code kind
of decoded and then the bottom results
you see here how the whole space in a
way is one huge intertwining knots which
allowed the condominiums on the top and
the hotel functions both to use the more
general functions which are actually
located in the north part which you can
see here so the idea of of this kind of
armature is that there is a really
intense intertwined space then not and
are not is another mathematical
principle right it's the fact that you
can knot things but we don't have two
ends but always loop back to each other
and then here the tower has this the
entrance on one side you should have
turned around on the other one bit and
the other end to get another part coming
out which is the pool and then around
the kind of interior courtyards you get
all these public functions which are
focused around this crystalline space
the rooms are basically all divided
through the two arms and the apartments
are here on top the pixelation and yeah
you can see it the pixelation you see
here is literally a registration of the
proximity to the lob line very simple
rule if you're right on the love line
you can have 10% glass and as you move
away you can have more and because we
had this kind of diagonal shape which
constantly moves from the load line away
and then loops back it's quite nice that
the facades picked up that pattern as
you register the proximity so it's
that's why it's kind of this graduation
or gradiation of the pixelation the
pixelation is stone and glass so
basically it's a sterling last hour and
of course because of that big opening in
the middle sometimes you have two
different towers and then they connect
back to one and here you see the big
public space so the idea is that if you
come in through this arm you get a five
storey Lobby the ground floor lobby is
connected to meeting rooms to a big ramp
which is also or the ramp of the parking
garage below the spa is suspended here
and this is a two storey restaurant
which has a terrace in the in the inside
of the building see the other side and
this is that kind of armature in the
middle which kind of starts to connect
all the different spaces inside and
start to connect the different floors
you see that here again and this is the
this is actually the restaurant here
this is done in the terrace so here the
terrace you start will be kind of inside
of that last area the registration of
the whole loop we gave a pattern of kind
of a large forest the interesting thing
is you only see the forest if you zoom
out so if you're actually in your room
you see only a few dots but if you look
down on the roof of the pool you would
see kind of more of a pattern because we
chose the pixels I should see very very
large so that there's no real pattern
it's more of a kind of a dot system this
is in the restaurant looking at and then
this is back to the entrance of the
hotel this hotel is a five-star hotel
itself for the dhm group it's it's
probably the most well known parts of
that hotel is the Setai in miami or the
cherry
in Bali it's an Asian group it's quite
interesting very very very high and the
interior designer is from Bali so it's
going to be quite an interesting
contrast I wouldn't want to do the
interior to be almost in this one but we
thought of one here because we had to
solve this was quite interesting so you
make a building at a 45 degree glass
facade and we did that because we build
basically as you understood the full
building envelope so you get interesting
areas and we thought are we beautiful to
kind of have this as a wood deck with
plants in it and then your baths and
right so that if you're sitting in your
bath you can kind of contemplative Li
study the clouds go in a very poetic and
it has automatic blinds coming down just
in case sometimes then we do so while
we're working on bigger projects we'll
also do very small projects this is a
town house in New York City we there's a
landmark area so the front of the
building here is actually a very
standard landmark little town house
nothing special from here everything was
gutted and taken out and we have added
12 foot to the building as you can see
here so this basically is added to the
building and the back facade is
completely new so it's quite an
interesting thing to build a completely
new building but reverse you will never
see it from the street and actually only
people in the courtyard will ever seen
in new buildings so but the concept was
to kind of rethink this facade like a
little bit like we did with the the big
of Greenwich building as a three
dimensional zone and where you would be
really connected so that the the the
husband is a writer he's working here
the living room areas are here so that
through these kind of glass floors you
would always have contact with each
other and then it folds back as a big
terrace here bedroom and two bedrooms up
here so that kind of the idea that the
whole building has this intertwined zone
through kind of fluctuating around the
facade rather than the facade being a
separate
membrane here you see the studies of
kind of very spinal elements it was
quite funny I had to go through
landmarks imagined landmarks in New York
is kind of a whole group of serious
historians and preservationists
and here I come with these kind of
things now it's kinda an interesting
battle
so my we hired a historian because we
thought we have to become historical on
this thing and he called it a Victorian
tea porch I actually have to look up
what a tea porch really was I'm from
Holland we don't have teas and porches
and things like that we just go
ice-skating or a saying so yeah I got
very well-versed in the whole story and
we explained it and they loved it which
was really thanks to him because I don't
know how I would have explained this
otherwise except for the fact I'm really
interested in 3d spaces and you know the
other thing which is fascinating is that
this thing is made with this machine up
here the other people will work with a
lot apart from MIT Media Lab is a car
design company in California and they
have this huge CNC router thing where
they can basically cut a whole car out
of foam and when I taught at Harvard
last semester and basically I asked him
to come and talk to the students we were
thinking about building components and
he wanted to see my office basically
explaining this facade and I was like
I'm not quite sure how I'm gonna make
this except for saying that maybe to
bali or whatever nothing and it's like
are you kidding i can stick this in my
machine because it's less than 20 feet
wide so this this is gonna be made in
three pieces he can basically make this
whole bit in one jump this whole bit in
one jump it's gonna be linked over these
lines here and then the top in another
jump so it's quite an interesting and
it's made out of recycled wood from made
from old boats actually which we get
from Bob in the end something came up
buddy here you see the studies as you
can see we have the 3d printer you
probably have here as well were you
basically three print 3d models we did a
lot of studies like to kind of figure
out whether we could kind of show it
more as a force field to see whether
these forces in the episode could
registering the surfaces sorry go back
one here on the upper upper thing we
have seating also building and a planter
in between these two levels and then you
know how to sit in the glass I didn't
want to have an aluminum facade in a
wood facade so we're really considering
the wood as a big huge window where we
put the glass straight in which is kind
of safer because if you had more
materials it would be kind of tricky
with expansion and all kinds of other
things here you have some more details
we like to detail obviously we really do
sit there and busy figuring it all out
so here you have the area looking down
through these glassy areas and you stare
down the other really interesting thing
is how you make actually this wood
because obviously you can't have these
huge chunks of wood so you can choose
whether you want to laminate the wood
beams this way or whether you show the
flame so it's a really interesting study
because we actually did some different
ones where you need to get a stripy
pattern or you get all the the
variations huge difference big decisions
the big decisions in those small days is
the facade if you look up and you can
see the neighbors it's quite an you know
I was wondering like here we have all
this struggle to go through landmarks
and then they have this next door I
actually said that I think in the
landmark meeting when I got really
irritated they're not very sensitive to
those kind of details or remarks for
that matter so here you you get the the
seating and then the plans it's quite
nice because it feels like very very
open we have the wood running into the
space also so you have this continuity
of in and outside it's a very protective
back guard and so potentially you could
have these facades open all summer and
then this is a huge project we were
in Brussels very very interesting
question a client who found a tunnel a
traffic tunnel so Carter Carter know
which is kind of half of Avenue Louisa
which is a big huge shopping Boulevard
in Brussels and Tunnel is only half the
boulevard so this is quite an
interesting clever idea he has proposed
to the city to elongate the tunnel and
pay for it and in exchange to build on
the tunnel so now he has free
construction grounds versus you know the
city getting a tunnel so everyone's kind
of happy with that and then they asked
us to make 10 pavilions in a park on the
tunnel not that easy it's kind of
interesting because you can't make
foundations as you can imagine and you
can't put any load on the tunnel which
is another problem but and what we did
what we thought was really important is
to make the inside spaces as important
as the outside spaces so not to design
buildings with interiors but to consider
the interior of the pavilion the
interior of the park all interior so
what we did is we took a little sound
piece took the frequencies it's also
nice about Maya
and then inflected these frequencies on
shapes where this started to occur is
there a lot of work in between these two
you can imagine but I don't want to bore
you with all the details but what
happened is so the idea is really that
these exterior spaces the green spaces
are as designed as the interior spaces
the other thing we thought is that when
you start thinking about this project is
that the moment you listen to a
developer which we kind of try is that
there is very little green space so the
other thing we did is that we made green
houses inside of the pavilions because I
thought it'd be really beautiful if you
could imagine that one shop was
separated from another whatever gallery
let's say through a greenhouse full of
orchids or a bamboo or some
like that at the same time we make the
roof so they collect water and there's
retaining tanks and it's kind of an
automatic irrigation system so both the
park and the greenhouses are irrigated
automatically we made a whole path for
gardeners you know how they can garden
the outside spaces the inside greenhouse
spaces and keep walking through the
through the park so this was the the
proposal it's a pretty low it's like a
sometimes three and a half sometimes two
stories and a story below ground and the
other thing is that we thought of all
kinds of ways of making green without
needing grounds so we have suspended
green we have self dissolving green we
have all kinds of green here you start
to see a little bit of it these are
actually big big huge mesh shapes which
have hanging green you'll see that in a
second
and then these interior spaces so this
basically always these kind of fluid
connections and the greenhouses you
don't see them very well here but they
connect obliquely through these volumes
so the the gardener actually has more
shortcuts than the normal pedestrian and
here you see a little bit of a section
so the car traffic there's also a subway
to make things more complex then we are
kind of half on the ground who made
these all double-height so that when
you're in the park you can look down and
you have lights and then here you see
one of those gaps with the greenhouses
and the way we developed we actually
developed the whole skin with an
engineer from Holland who is the first
person who developed tree span concrete
shells very old man so the whole idea is
that there is no structure in the in the
skins at all it's basically free span it
has lots of little perforations so
there's daylight coming into spaces and
these kind of systems stand almost like
tables or like freestanding structures
within the big shells so it's kind of a
complete other way of thinking because
as you can imagine this this was not
that easy to build on that's the sewers
whatever is in the ground lots of things
in man here we have the suspended
gardens so that I
really to kind of create that as a
really important element between this
and this suspended Gardens actually not
a cafe so we use the spaces occasionally
here and here also as different cafes or
a different exhibition spaces and here
you see our inspiration for green things
we got carried away with a green thing
and then you start to see how these
spaces and start to develop it's quite
interesting because these are very very
beautiful old town houses where we
actually also did a proposal for one of
those this is the messy forms these are
actually stairs inside of here where you
go to the restaurants below and then
they came to us and they said we would
like three squares and we would like an
ice rink like Rockefeller Center bit
bigger so here we go this is the ice
rink
and it's a third bigger than Rockefeller
Center by in the winter it is really an
ice-skating rink but in the summer we
dry it up and we use it for projection
of movies so that people can sit on the
steps these steps here and actually or
you know whatever dance events or
whatever other events because that much
water in a very wet climate is not as
that easy actually funny you know and
then this is another square where there
is a fountain this fountain reacts to
the sound of the traffic so if there's
lots of traffic you have lots of
fountain and if there's no traffic you
have no fountain have to be rigorous
about things I think but that's the idea
and it's also that it's just a
perforated skin so it's like a big whale
in the ground and the water really only
comes out in certain patterns and
sporadically so theoretically if you
don't mind getting wet you could walk
over it and you know have the fountain
around you so it's kind of the idea of
being a bit more easygoing about what a
fountain is or what an object is or how
you want to treat these kind of services
that's it
[Applause]
