good afternoon not evening with daylight
saving time
my name is dotan aware and as head of
landscape architecture at the Knowlton
school I have the great pleasure to
introduce tonight's lecture Elliott
Margulies Lee at Margolis is currently
an associate professor of landscape
architecture at Toronto Daniels
where she not only serves as the
director of the MLA program but also as
the associate dean of research she
should know that when you do too good of
a job they always ask you to do more it
is a great satisfaction for Paola Meyer
Inc and myself to have Liat visit as we
have known her for 15 years back when
she was a student at Harvard GSD the ED
Margolis was a memorable student not
because of the rapid color succession of
her hair which always threw me back when
I did the desperate and I didn't
recognize her but rather because of her
self motivation as a graduate student
she co-founded and directed the
materials collection in the basement of
the Harvard GSD and developed her first
book from this early interest the
resulting living systems innovative
materials and technologies for Landscape
Architecture co-authored with Alex
Robinson who is currently at USC was
published by Bayer Kaiser in 2007 it
made those of us who write for rather
obscure on rather obscure topics and for
minimal audiences more than a bit
envious as within two years the book was
translated into German French and
Chinese this project in the materials
collection were neither beginning nor an
end for Elliott Margulies
they formed a next step to her
undergraduate education in industrial
design at RISD and her directing
research at material connection in New
York they also offered a stepping stone
to her academic research although she
comes to us from the cold she has not
forgotten her Israeli origins and a
concern for drought she co-authored with
Isaiah Aziza Shani out of water design
solutions for arid regions which was
published by big Heiser in 2014 she also
contributed papers and essays on water
infrastructure and innovative technology
in Jordan more recently and closer to
her home base in Toronto the at Margolis
has founded the
with lab the green roof innovation
testing laboratory at Toronto Daniels
which he now directs grid lab includes
33 green roof test beds three green
walls a weather station and 270 sensors
that collect data on soil moisture
temperature rainfall solar exposure and
wind every five minutes to provide
metrics for so-called green and clean
technologies intern interdisciplinary
research on the performance of
greenroofs and greenwalls informs urban
water management policy and green
building standards she can also play the
grand game and has secured significant
funding from the canadian federal
government and the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council as well as
garden support from industrial partners
she received a 2013 Award of Excellence
in research from the American Society of
landscape architects and is now sitting
on the prestigious University of Toronto
Presidential Committee on the
environment climate change and
sustainability
she's also committed to diversity and
social justice she has created with the
indigenous elders and the regional
conservation authority a new program
that combines indigenous teachings
Landscape Architecture and environmental
conservation field work for indigenous
high-school students she's the rare
design nerd that can speak to
multiplicity of audiences from the
scientific and landscape architecture
communities to the general public and in
doing so integrates green blue and
social infrastructure please join me in
welcoming Lee at Margolis for inviting
me it's very lovely to be here once
again I was here in 2008 when the
building was just finished and it's so
nice to see that kind of energy in the
building and
extraordinary the work that's being done
in studios so tada tonight I want to
share with you the work that I've been
doing at the University of Toronto with
the grit lab essentially since 2009 when
when I arrived there so now ten years
and the title of my talk tonight as
shades of green and the reason for that
is because in the last 20 years we've
all noticed a kind of increased
awareness and importance and and the
kind of metrics by which landscape
architecture and landscape architecture
projects are measured for their success
according to their environmental
performance and not green standards have
become a real kind of standard
ubiquitous standard for most projects
and the question that always interested
me is with regards to looking at how
landscapes are constructed and how
material configurations are actually
affecting performance is a question of
how green are we how green is green
and the second question that this talk
will address is thinking about a kind of
a self-reflective process and the role
as an academic within an academic
institution what that has afforded me
the kind of privilege that I have as an
academic to develop both a criticality
around environmental performance and
also thinking about an engaged practice
what that means as well as an
evidence-based research on green
infrastructure and sustainability and
what does that mean in terms of pedagogy
research and the kind of impacts that we
might have on a profession on policy on
industry and all the kind of sectors
that are coming together to actually
forge ahead with pathways towards
sustainability
so shortly after I arrived at in Toronto
the City of Toronto has done something
that was quite progressive and launched
the very first and only green roof by
law in North America which essentially
mandates that all new construction above
6000 square feet must have a green roof
today to date Toronto has 6 million
square feet in green roofing which
surpasses any city in North America and
this came about after a seminal paper
that was published by Ryerson University
which did a kind of a simulation on what
would be the implications for water
management stormwater management flood
reduction relative to climate change
adaptation and what would be the kind of
urban cooling impacts of green roof and
and that paper basically convinced the
city to in some ways put the cart before
the horse before testing any of these
kind of performance metrics relative to
the Toronto climate and put this
legislation a very progressive
legislation forward now this green roof
bylaw is not a standalone and what's
interesting is the kind of confluence of
policy that's happening in Toronto in
which this is just one mechanism out of
many looking at landscape as
infrastructure looking at kind of
ecosystem services on a wide regional
all the way to a material architectural
detail 2013 the city adopted its wet
weather flow management which has now
gone into a second revision mandating
that all new properties new construction
hold under 90% of stormwater runoff
a really extraordinary 2005 green belt
around the City of Toronto 2 million
acres of protection for no development
around around the City of Toronto the
City of Toronto they're in pink you know
and you can see the kind of the Seven
River sheds that cut through the cities
as a kind of a post-glacial remnant
which is the main geographical feature
of Toronto and the Greenbelt is meant to
protect the headwaters of all of that
all of that watershed running into Lake
Ontario the Toronto ravine strategy then
followed looking at the protection of
all of these ravines and this dates back
to the Toronto region conservation
authorities effort since the 1950s post
Hurricane Hazel which basically allows
them to have the jurisdiction for all
the watersheds they can actually take
developers to court if they deem their
development compromising the
hydrological and ecological health of
these ravines so this is 40,000 acres of
land that is managed by the Toronto
major conservation authority the city
now has 27 percent urban canopy cover
and it's its objective is to go up to
40% canopy cover with mountain 1 million
trees as an objective to plant on
private property interestingly part of
the province Official Plan green
infrastructure was finally added
alongside grey infrastructure
acknowledging the landscape has the same
regulatory environmental regulation
potential as a pipe or you know a road
and that we should value them in
along the same kind of valuation systems
the Toronto green standard which is the
kind of the localized version of the
lead for building under which the
Toronto green roof standard comes in
most recently the Green Streets
technical guidelines looking at the
implementation and retrofit of streets
to hold on to a stormwater runoff and
looking also at other things like
mobility bike mobility and so on
biodiversity in green roofs the
pollinator protection strategy looking
at Toronto is B city and most recently
still in draft form a biodiversity
strategy for the City of Toronto so this
is the kind of context in which green
roofs and where my work has been looking
at the kind of the policies of the
matrix of policies that are happening
and they're they're being adopted by the
city of Toronto and looking at how the
legislation and then the construction
standards fit within the performance
objectives that the city has the other
thing that I think is worth kind of
contextualizing is this idea of metrics
in general which has become over the
last couple of decades a way in which
that we understand ecosystem services
and that that has become part of
[Music]
economics parlance in other words you
have for instance TD Bank evaluating
Toronto's urban canopy at seven billion
dollars eighty million dollars annually
in ecosystem services from stormwater
management urban cooling carbon
sequestration air quality and so on and
then conversely looking at offsetting 90
million tonnes of air pollution
through car emissions per year and yet
another kind of parallel track to
looking at all the literature on on
performance metrics relative to
ecosystem services is another kind of
literature around the performance gap
looking at this idea that but there are
three or four rather main performance
graphs that we're looking at one is
between projected and actual performance
so we think we're doing something really
good but in reality it's it's not quite
hitting the mark so for instance a study
came out several years ago around LEED
buildings a hundred LEED buildings that
were studied thirty of which were
underperforming thirty of which hit the
mark thirty of which over performed in
other words we we only know who thirty
percent and wouldn't it be important to
know not only where we're
underperforming but also where we're
over performing and that kind of
question around workflow and how do we
look at performance monitoring as
feeding back into the professional
practice so that we can look at how we
actually optimize what we're doing how
we're changing standards and what are
these kind of feedback loops into the
profession into policy into industry
material manufacturing the other is
disciplinary and we're looking at really
complex systems right living systems are
are can be studied in in in so many
different ways and they're often studied
in silos while we know that the issues
are actually cross-cutting and actually
interdependent and not only not always
in synergy with one another sometimes
you have incongruities between
performance objectives or actual
performance the third is sectoral and
what's happening in terms of academic
research was happening in industry
sometimes
among many different industries what's
happening in policy those are running in
in their own tracks and in their own
timelines right subject to their own
kind of regulations and cycles of Mayors
and government and manufacturing
timelines and investments and academic
work and publishing and grand funding
these are all working in different
cycles and these are also problematic
and then regional living systems are not
cut and paste and science that is
generated in Singapore around green
roofs could not be cut and pasted to
Toronto and so on and so forth and then
and then the other aspect is that when
you're talking about materials you're
really talking about material flows that
are locally mined and so looking at the
kind of context of where materials are
coming from for that industry is also
really important so that's the kind of
the context to the work and and granted
all of this I'm able to say after ten
years of thinking about it because when
I entered this in 2009 I had no idea
what I was getting at myself into but
what was really interesting was that the
City of Toronto had adopted its green
roof by law and never tested the
construction standard and immediately
that provided with an opportunity with
seed funding from the city of Toronto in
fact and then industry collaborations
that provided much of the funding for
the construction of the of the lab to do
an empirical study an evidence-based
study looking at the common industry
practices relative to some of the
performance ambitions in Toronto and
making this something that is really
regionally specific and that is
something that is happening across in
science with many colleagues who are
doing similar work in various other
regions
you know we're we're really kind of
looking at green worse 2.0 and we know
that green roofs work and the same thing
could be said for a lot of other
technologies or landscape or ecological
systems so for instance on average any
green roof will hold on to 50% of water
annually that's that's quite a bit of
impact when you're thinking about water
retention relative to flood mitigation
or runoff reduction right so we know
that they're good and the questions are
more about can we get even better
because the notion of of optimization is
this this idea that there is really no
free lunch everything that we have has
been extracted
mined manufactured there are missions
that are involved or emitted in
manufacturing and in transportation
there's there's carbon that's that's
emitted and so what how do we evaluate
the kind of the performance benefits
that we have relative to the
environmental impact of the materials
that we put forth even if they are
seemingly Green this is an image of this
another set up on our roof where we're
looking at a combination of solar
technologies and green roofs together
currently the two industries are at odds
with one another competing for the same
roof scape so we're asking ourselves how
can we think about kind of a multi
objective performance not only with
respect to the performances with for the
green roofs themselves but how do we
look at for instance
climate change mitigation via renewable
energy and climate change adaptation via
green roofs in terms of let's say flood
mitigation habitat provision and so on
why can't we think of these systems
together and the other thing is that if
we if we are thinking about multi
multiple objectives and optimization we
have to think in an interdisciplinary
way and the only way to really move
forward with this kind of research is to
break the silos and look at where all
the kind of expertise lies in and around
the university and elsewhere in industry
and in in government to really bring
some of this work forward so as dalton
mentioned in 2011 we we set up 33 test
beds on our former faculty building on
the fifth story and this was to
essentially study extensive green roofs
which are the the kind of the common
green roofs that are being employed so
that six inches a maximum of six inches
and the main performance criteria that
we were looking at our stormwater
management and so for many older cities
like Toronto where you have combined
storm sewer you're dealing with surges
of storms with not only flooding but
also contaminants that are ending up in
in waterways and water bodies thermal
cooling is another major aspect of of
urban concern looking at all the kind of
surfaces roof escapes and
Ashville around the city that
contributes to urban heat island and
consequently the need for excessive
cooling and then in turn more fuel use
etc etc this kind of vicious cycle not
to mention the health impact of
increased heat which you know plenty of
papers are talking about these days
plant growth and biodiversity how do we
look at that this kind of a green roof
as compensating for the loss of
ecological habitat in areas and for us
in particular looking at pollinators
pollinator habitats and then ultimately
we're asking ourselves which design
parameters are more significant for
water capture thermal cooling plant
cover and pollinator habitat the
experimental design we have 33 test beds
and we have a kind of mini roof scapes
so they're wooden structures with an
inverted roof of the membrane flashing a
drainage board filter cloth growing
media vegetation and irrigation on top
of that and that's been constructed and
in still and monitored since 2011 so in
its eighth year now so this is kind of a
summary of the of the experimental
design what's called a multifactorial
experimental design looking at multiple
design factors and trying to correlate
them in different configurations how
they actually impact the performance the
four performances that we're looking at
you have the design variables in the
middle there and then what we're looking
at are the alternatives to what the City
of Toronto either requires or recommends
and so what they recommend in terms of
the growing media is what follows the
German standard abbreviated FLL and you
can see that on the left there
it's a highly mineral aggregate content
very low organic content designed to be
fast draining and to support primarily
zarok planting like sedum things that
are can withstand very in control rate
drought and very low nutrients in
contrast what came out with what what
came up with conversation with industry
is a biologically derived wood compost
based high organic content designed to
be really high absorptive and you can
see the kind of graph this is just a
kind of an in-house lab test looking at
the soil moisture capacity of the two
different growing media the left being
probably applied I'd say 90% of the time
across North America not just in Toronto
the other prevalent plant selection is
the sedum mat and these are often time
pre grown and out of the 30,000 papers
on green roofs worldwide amazing rain
many of them are actually looking at
sedum so the bottom line is that they
are applicable to so many climate
regions and they're chosen because they
often time maintain their cover and
cover is one of the main main metrics or
metrics by which green roots are
measured in the City of Toronto as well
and this is how it comes it comes in
these kind of rolled mats you can cut
them with scissors they're very easy to
install so that's another plus and
benefit and why people or installers
like sedum and then upon ribbon-cutting
you have an already kind of finished
landscape it's green you don't have to
wait for the seed to actually take hold
and for the to germinate and for the
plants to establish so you know that's
another another plus in contrast we
looked at again things that we learned
from industry is a selection of sixteen
grasses and forbs herbaceous flowering
planting that were native to Toronto but
also native to a kind of a wider
spectrum of a regions the kind of plants
that you might find in rural conditions
on the side of a road
your Yarrow's and black-eyed Susans and
a kanesha and liatris and Primrose and
so on and things that green roofers have
told us but pretty much are working
really well and they're they're a couple
of principles there one is the sedum is
a non-native species to Canada and I'll
get to that in in a few slides
while the grasses and forbs are native
to to the area and also have a much
wider diversity in other words de-what
in ecology it's called functional niches
right that you have tall shading plants
that suck up a lot of water you have
creeping plants that provide with a kind
of ground cover and if one species fails
for one reason or another
others can compensate well when you have
a monoculture even though you have
multiple cultivars with the sedum if
anything
if faced with any sort of adversity then
you have a kind of a massive die-off
with regards to supplemental irrigation
the City of Toronto recommends water
conservation and then you know in turn
lead gives points for non irrigated
landscapes so what is happening in the
industry is that you have essentially
either non irrigated landscapes or green
roofs and the industry essentially
advocates for that and and promotes the
idea that green roofs are
maintenance-free and then the other
common practice is automated irrigation
so daily irrigation and what we wanted
to look at is soil moisture activated
irrigation so what's called on-demand
irrigation so three different irrigation
treatments so we all know we have the
two different soil types or growing
media types we also have two different
depths the four inches which is the
minimum that the city requires and then
we wanted to look at six inches to see
if that would make a difference if we
actually went deeper and we have the to
planting types and the three irrigation
regimes and those are all interspersed
and co mixed everything is censored with
instruments so just for the green roof
setup alone we have twenty two hundred
and seventy sensors that are recording
temperature surface temperature air
temperature soil moisture and and water
discharge from each one of the test beds
in five minutes intervals and that's a
rendering showing the kind of the
thermal profile above the bed and that
goes through the bed and underneath the
bed we have an infrared sensor that
looks at surface temperature we have a
tipping bucket rain gauge that looks at
of discharge and a soil moisture sensor
inside of the bed and these this is all
the kind of design that our students are
are doing looking at all those kind of
the sensor instrumentation and
installation and wiring and coding and
programming and then each bed is then
compared to our weather station that's
on site also recording weather data so
for instance we can know the duration
and the intensity of a storm we can look
at the total volume and and a duration
and compare that to how much water was
discharged for me to bed how much then
goes into evaporation or rapid
transpiration and what's the delay in to
the peak of the storm which is what
engineers are really concerned with is
actually how how can you offset hold on
to the water while there's a large storm
moving through the city and then once
the storm is out then it could start
trickling down and just to show you what
our students are involved with 5,000
linear feet of cable just for the green
roof setup alone that they had to wire
and code and and and and and figure all
of that out in parallel to the green
roof setup we also looked at green
facades and looking at what are what's
the thermoregulatory potential of green
facades on building envelopes and
actually in the background there on the
top you can see the weather station we
censored all the wall with surface
temperatures looking at correlating
essentially vine growth over the full
summer and looking at three different
growth forms of vine some that for
instance
you know shoot right straight up and
then or some that have a kind of a
horizontal growth form and so on and so
forth and how that would affect the
cover of the wall and then the
temperature cooling relative to exposed
wall and then shortly after we finished
the those installations we started with
another installation which was quite
challenging looking at the combination
of solar and green roof and here the
question was are there benefits in
combining green work with solar
photovoltaic arrays and as I mentioned
before the two industries are at odds
with one another the green roof industry
vying for the fact that they're
providing with stormwater management and
habitat primarily and also surface
cooling while the solar industry is
basically saying well with regards to
energy insulation for the for the
building or any sort of cooling the
impact on energy in other words and is
negligible relative to renewable energy
you should just put solar up there
forget the green roof so here are the
two industries at odds and we were
saying why either/or why not both we are
the first and only that I know of
academic Institute that has this kind of
an installation and study in Canada and
very few around the world they're about
a handful of them that I'm aware of that
are actually looking at the combination
what would be the optimal kind of height
between roofing what is the effect of
temperature on energy production so just
so you know solar energy is a is the
best products out there on a market are
just about 18% efficiency which means
that by the time you finish your costs
you are looking at a kind of a
eight to ten year rate of return on your
investment which is quite significant to
a developer or a building owner operator
then energy the the energy production
and the lifetime of PV panels decrease
as they're overheated so if they're on
top of a conventional rooftop they're
overheated they're energy production
lifetime decreases and you're cutting
into your costs even further so what
what we were looking at is can we
actually optimize energy production by
maintaining a cool ambient temperature
below solar panels and at the same time
have the co-benefits of water management
and habitat but there's still questions
around what's the effect of shading on
plant growth given that cooling is a
byproduct of evapotranspiration and you
need solar exposure for transpiration of
plants and then what would be the kind
of water balance and and stormwater
management given that you have variable
water conditions in in shade of rain and
in the drip line of rain and what how
that would begin to affect the
installation and then ultimately what
would be the kind of the optimal height
between the green roof and the solar
panels and we worked very closely with
the university looking at this
installation being a 40 panel 11
kilowatt setup to feed into the grid of
the U of T in other words being part of
their low carbon portfolio
so all in all this is the rendering of
the setup on on our old building the
first lab that that that we started with
three areas of installation and one
thing that I think has been really
important is the kind of long excuse me
the long term monitoring of these setups
so a lot of studies are kind of looking
at a one-year or two-year excuse me
study but what we're finding is that the
kind of succession of plants and the
kind of effects on planting the design
factors effects on plant growth is only
really apparent and evident further down
the line so we have you know over 15 now
science papers that have been published
in in various journals and all of which
are interdisciplinary and trying to
bring all of these kind of lenses
together and and that these kind of
findings have begun to now influence the
policies that I mentioned to you before
and looking and questioning and
revisiting the standards and the kind of
nuanced language around performance not
only for green roofs but also in in
other aspects of plant selection soil
relationship with plants and water
management and so on
the the other thing that's been really
important for us is is looking at
dissemination and public outreach given
that so many of these policies are
subject to political will and the kind
of a wide understanding by the public of
why these things are actually important
and this is an image of doors open
Toronto where we hosted over one weekend
over 200 people and we often time do
these kind of presentations to
professional groups and special interest
groups schools and and so on now just a
bit of a glimpse you know in terms of
the performance gaps that I mentioned
earlier and maybe just a couple of
highlights to mention in terms of what
we found that was different than what
the common standards in the industry and
what the policy was calling for so the
prevalent industry practice is the
mineral aggregate the sedum no
irrigation and either for inches or less
than four inches a lot of installations
that we found were a two and a half
inches then and naught is about 90
percent of installations in Toronto and
I would say probably the same could be
said for North America what we found was
actually that the organic medium far
surpassed e or the mineral aggregate for
stormwater management for thermal
cooling and plant growth particularly
for the biodiverse grass forb mix
now there's a lot of myths in terms of
the organic so they're vilified quite a
bit in a lot of areas regions one there
is a kind of myth that there is
prolonged compaction and loss of
organics over time and we showed we did
a survey of thirty roofs across Toronto
at different ages 17 years old in some
cases and looked at no compaction and no
loss of organics and there's a process
called pedo Genesis which is the
creation of soil through organics
essentially constantly supplementing the
organic content of the soil and then the
other myth is nutrient loading so
nitrogen phosphorous leaching out of the
soil of the organics and ending up in
water bodies increasing what's called
eutrophication or algebra keishon of of
water bodies and the kind of the
consequences of that and that is also a
huge mess now
green roofs kind of fall between green
infrastructure which is particularly
living systems and low-impact
development green roof is a mechanism of
low-impact development but so is a
cistern and so when you compare nutrient
loading of a cistern or a porous
pavement well that's a zero and the
green roof is obviously you know has you
know discharge of nutrients and still
when you look at it in the grand scheme
of things of fertilizers put on to
landscapes that are not at all subject
to any of that scrutiny or the
wastewater treatment plants in Toronto
that are actually putting out nutrients
directly into Lake Ontario
it's a miniscule fraction even if you
covered all of Toronto with green roofs
with organic soil so these kind of
myth-busting is what we've been trying
to do
with the industry the other is that
irrigation is definitely the most
significant factors for all three
performance criteria but in opposite
ways so for water retention its it
certainly decreases water retention and
if you have daily irrigation you go down
to 30 percent retention versus average
50 percent or if you have the no
irrigation at 70 percent retention right
so the big big gap there but it's
absolutely necessary in a climate like
Toronto and I think Columbus would fall
into the same kind of climate zone of
very extreme weather patterns is that if
there is an objective to have a by
diverse mix not just the sedum
irrigation is absolutely critical and
what we found is year two into it after
drought and in July we had essentially
full die-off of the by diverse mix never
to actually recover and consequently
soil erosion essentially that bed never
returned it was just dirt and so where
we found the kind of reconciliation is
looking at on-demand irrigation which
not only maintains plant growth but also
achieves 50 percent water conservation
relative to daily irrigation and so with
the combination of the on-demand and
organic you can still maintain the 70
percent retention the third is and this
came as a shock to us because we thought
that the bio diverse mix given the fact
that it has large biomass a lot of
structure a lot of you know surface area
to suck up water and evapotranspiration
or that
I would play a good sort of a mechanism
in that to our surprise sedum was still
a top performer and what we then thought
that rather than evapotranspiration that
interception plays a role and that is
now looking zooming in to the kind of
the micro micro of plant surface and
material looking at this kind of a waxy
cupping structure these kind of mini
puddles and evaporation works faster
than transpiration infiltrate ie
infiltration into the soil and then
uptake by by the plants so we ran
another study which is now under review
for publication looking at what if you
actually intermix the two species and
what we found was that one actually
worked really well during a rain event
so you've got the interception and then
the other worked really well in the post
event a transpiration so conclusion is
you can actually achieve both if you mix
the two together then achieving the kind
of the biodiversity and the water
management in even a more optimal manner
so again why why either or why not both
and why is all this really important
when I'm talking about biodiversity
native non-native I'm sure you've heard
these kind of discussions Lapita ultra
DG and others who are advocating for you
know non-natives and versus natives and
all these kinds of discussions and one
thing that really concerned us was
looking at the correlation between
plants and pollinators giving that that
they are you see graphs that basically
show that when there is a decline in
vegetation in urban
direct decline in pollinators and the
same can be said the opposite if you
have a direct decline in pollinators you
have a direct a decline in in vegetation
and not only that that there are
relationships between certain species
and between pollinators and vegetation
species and when I'm talking about
pollinators I'm not talking about the
domestic social be ie the non-native
European honeybee I'm talking about
which are only eight species around the
world I'm talking about the 20,000
solitary often time either cavity
nesters or ground nesting bees 350 which
are native to to the City of Toronto so
here's 350 native wild bee species
two-thirds of which are ground nesters
so interesting for those who are working
on asphalt and green greening streets
and getting rid of all the kind of
impervious surfaces that have actually
completely eradicated pollinator ground
nesting habitats and that's another
study that we will do in the future
looking at green roof soil as a
potential nesting habitat not only
foraging but what's what what we found
was that with respect to the bees the
pollinators the the native pollinators
as ie the solitary bees were attracted
to the native meadow species I eat of
the grasses and the forbs and the
non-native honeybees were attracted to
the non-native sedum species and so if
we think about it as that 90% of Roof
escapes six million square feet of
rooftops in Toronto are now sedum
rooftops what does that mean in terms of
prioritizing ecological habitat for
native versus non native bee species and
what does that mean nobody has done that
study but it's a kind of a question mark
right the other study that we did which
sort of again scrutinize the kind of
policy that's coming out around Toronto
with respect to green roofs should be
everywhere green roofs should be on
every new construction and we're talking
about an average of a hundred and fifty
new towers some of which are a hundred
stories tall in Toronto yearly new
towers right since since the since about
ten years ago this kind of constant
growth of of condo towers office towers
in and around Toronto being the fourth
largest city in North America now and
what we found you know with respect to
pollinator habitats is that we wanted to
look at whether there's any correlation
between building elevation and B
visitation and what we found is that
after the eight story there's really no
very little if any B visitation and so
the idea of designing for biodiversity
at the 20th 40th 60th story is really
not viable and this is where we went
back into the city and said given the
fact that you have a kind of a tower and
podium typology that's very common in
Toronto
think about the podium as the biodiverse
space and what you do up top on the 60th
floor floor could either be something to
do with water management or actually
just put a white roof up there and
reflect the Sun and put a cistern on the
bottom but really think about this as a
three dimensional problem and are kind
of not necessarily just a policy to be
to be put everywhere so the conclusion
in other words we said okay site
matters and then non all green roofs are
created equal and nor should they be one
thing that for us has been really
important is the kind of the
partnerships and the industrial
partnerships that we've been working
with and you know one is that it's a
really important mechanism to leverage
federal funding for grants and also get
their in-kind contributions for
materials and construction and and all
of the kind of aspects of building these
installations that are quite quite
complicated but also in terms of
thinking about the research questions
and these industries have their finger
on the pulse they're the ones
constructing things and understanding
what's actually happening in industry
what they're what they're learning is
really feeding into our research
questions and then and then furthermore
the kind of training opportunities the
the kind of hands-on opportunities for
training students so all of this has
been and these are just a series of
shots of where our students are actually
working with our industry partners to
construct all of this and thinking about
these as experiential learning and
training programs for for all of our
students and actually learning hands-on
what does it take to build a landscape
look at these technologies how do you
control them from all the way from going
out to see the house sedum has actually
grown and said these are the sedum mats
in the field and a nursery pre grown
then cut rolled and shipped here talking
to the growers and and listening to
their woes relative to the industry and
then going also to see all sorts of
installations in and around Toronto and
learning from the designers of their
experience designing our own
designing or macgyvering our own sensors
and learning what that actual mechanism
is from the actual components all the
way to programming it and data analyzing
it and then ultimately this kind of an
interdisciplinary collaboration between
students that this kind of exchange of
knowledge between all the science
students and the design students
together thinking about new new
knowledge --is and and new methodologies
this is just a couple of examples of how
the kind of interdisciplinarity have
produced new ways of thinking we
photograph our beds on a bi-weekly basis
and post them to our website and we've
developed we had the students work on
essentially if you can see up here a
kind of database that allows you to sort
by all the different design factors and
then a scroll a time scroller which
allows you to see all the images of the
beds how they're doing throughout the
season and over the seven-year period
and then we were also really interesting
and this was another assignment for the
students as a kind of an
interdisciplinary collaboration looking
at visually correlating discrete
datasets taking all the reams of data
that we're getting essentially tabulated
in an Excel spread how might you
actually visually correlate that so we
were using grasshopper as a way to begin
to construct these kind of forms that
correlated in red temperature input and
output ie cooling in
blue water input precipitation and then
runoff and then cover as the full 360
circle and then structure as in the
height and looking at if you have the
different design factors what would that
look like and trying to essentially see
that all together and then this is on
our website you can visit that and see
what what how that tool operates and it
actually gives you then when you click
on it the specific temperature and what
the outputs was or the differences
between cooling and runoff and how that
actually fares relative to the Toronto
standard we also with the biology
professor that I've been working with
looking at interdisciplinary pedagogy
and thinking about seminars research
seminars that fuse the kind of knowledge
and approach in biology and ecology
around pollinator pollinator habitats
and design approaches and processes so
we came up with this course that was
called biomimetic architecture analog B
habitats looking at particularly cavity
nesters and beginning to draw where
certain bee species nest naturally
typically in the stems of broken
vegetation and this was a kind of
metadata that each bee species is
correlated to a specific diameter of a
cavity a sheathing material underneath
they have very specific housing
requirements and looking at all that and
this was a kind of on the on the right
what my colleague designs to do these
kinds of tests around the city to look
at where bees are nesting ie the
correlating building height to be
nesting with a GPS
recorder there and in turn our students
together then built these bee bee
habitats that looked at for instance
this would be something that would come
flat in a package so it's laser-cut
designed specifically for a leaf cutter
B with a specific you know diameter for
the cavity it could be installed as a
kind of a sculptural element that could
then be taken apart studied by a
scientist cleaned up and then
reinstalled again the following season
another kind of idea was that there is
no science yet around what solar aspect
bees actually prefer do they like their
nest to be in the Sun or away from the
Sun so this was a design of a decorative
fence into which there are cavity holes
and following the solar aspect this
would be a repeated design so that you
would have the replicates to have the
kind of experimental design study so
looking at at the the principles of
experimental design as I explained to
you with regards to the test beds these
kinds of various configurations and
replication of test beds so that you
have enough for statistical analysis but
in including that in a kind of a design
approach of how do we make our
landscapes an experiment on to
themselves that could be tested
replicated and provide statistical
analysis and at the same time aesthetics
this was an idea for a design for a
carpenter be so carpenter bees usually
borrow holes and decking and in nature
in logs and so on
using a Japanese technique of actually
charring wood for for waterproofing this
was this idea of looking at this
construction that would go over hideous
concrete highway sound barriers and that
would also provide the kind of potential
bee habitat so where we had a next we
moved to our own fancy building which
now has quite an amazing very unique
site because we have our own island and
subject to the Toronto wet weather flow
which now mandates 90% stormwater
retention and this is a common practice
as well we have a sub subterranean
cistern to collect the water and that is
a common practice in I'd say most of the
new buildings that are going up there
because it's the kind of the sure
engineering thing to put in for water
management so this gives us a really
unique opportunity and to date there are
no studies out there looking at the
reuse of cistern collected stormwater
runoff in irrigation so Toronto and many
other cities don't have any metrics or
benchmarks for reuse of water in in
irrigation so we're you're talking about
everything thats collecting off of the
sidewalk all the kind of hydrocarbons
that you're getting from cars everything
from east troughs and so on and so forth
ending in in the cistern and then used
for irrigation and then one of the most
prevalent problems as you can imagine is
salt
so what we're gonna do here is look at a
comparison between cistern and domestic
water supply for both water quality and
quantity and another kind of new
relationship that we forged is with
forestry looking at amendments to soil
how can we actually optimize soil and
that's leading us into new and really
interesting territory around degraded
urban soils that are nutrient poor ie
nitrogen poor and looking at amendments
for that green roof being not really a
soil but a growing media that doesn't
have a lot of nutrients or water
capacity for its shallow depth the
amendments could actually optimize
performance and also perhaps potentially
deal with pollution abatement and then
given that this is a full site and we
have the water cistern the idea of
actually looking at best practices in
full site water management not just the
green roof how can we now think about
all the different mechanisms working
together so you have the cistern but
it's full so if you actually emptied out
for irrigation you're allowing for more
water capture into the next rain event
in the kind of wet months that we're
getting back-to-back rain events so how
do green roofs perform as part of the
full site water strategy now we're kind
of zooming out into site scale so this
is the latest and greatest we're still
finishing construction of our new roof
we have 52 beds this was last summer
looking at students constructing all the
green roofs blowing the soil onto the
roof placing the vegetation
working with the irrigation and what's
interesting here are that we have the
three irrigation lines with controllers
that are actually activating whatever
water supply we need for each bed the
cistern the domestic and then
combination of the two and this is a
aerial image of the new roof under
construction last summer will be
instrumenting that in the coming summer
and so on most recently we received a
large grant to start a new program one
of a kind in green infrastructure so
this would be a six year program sixty
students for universities across Canada
eight international universities in
Japan Israel France the US and Australia
that all have green infrastructure labs
where students could go on exchange
programs and training essentially in an
interdisciplinary manner sixty students
that will go out into the field and
various capacities in green
infrastructure looking at the kind of
the next generation of professionals
that are that are needed to move the
this this this kind of ideal around
urbanism forward and the other thing
that is that we're looking at is what is
an again another unique opportunity our
building which has a building automated
system and how do we begin to look at
sensor technologies feeding into
different building automation systems
and working with facilities to look at
adaptive management
which are big questions around around
performance sort of optimization and
then lastly looking at what's the kind
of the potential of the campuses living
lab we are already I've already taken
over two buildings so why not continue
I'm working right now with U of T
planning to look at the hundred and
twenty buildings on campus and the
downtown campus alone to look at the
potential for our retrofitting some of
these buildings and looking at the the
kind of you know the fact that the
universities is essentially a single
landowner not having to be subject to
all sorts of different private owners
and properties has amazing capacity to
do experiments on their own buildings
and sites and that's something that I'm
trying to advocate along with a few
other colleagues at the University so
scaling up these ideas and then thinking
about what could the studies be around a
kind of a district scale block scale and
so on how do we begin to look at not
just individual roofs or individual
material configurations but what does
that mean on when you when you begin to
scale that up in conclusion what I
wanted to share with you are some of my
thoughts you know what what is the role
of experimental laboratories and design
schools and to particularly to explore
environmental performance and also
engage in dialogues on sustainability
and climate action I think there in my
mind there are really you know these
kind of four important principles around
multi sectoral engagement that is really
necessary to bring the kind of the
conversations into the Academy and then
back out into what's happening in policy
what's happening in industry and to
acknowledge that their knowledge is and
expertise isn't all
these different sectors that we have to
correlate together interdisciplinary
collaboration is really a must if we're
going to look at these kind of multi
objective multi performance aspects that
we're all really interested in with
respect to water energy the biology and
the kind of ecology and so on and to
really think about how do we build these
platforms that would allow us to work
together and exchange new modes for
research and teaching empirical research
seems to me really a kind of a also
another important method of actually
understanding learning kind of a
learning-by-doing
mechanism of really understanding green
technologies revealing the nuances as
they relate to different climate regions
and and urban regions and conditions and
then ultimately the kind of this this
notion of how do you create a platform
for innovation how do you what are the
kind of the mechanisms for these
knowledge transfer which are undoubtedly
really really difficult when we're all
having to adhere to the kind of the
disciplinary scope and limitations of
our schooling and promotions and and
professional accreditations and
licensure and so on and so forth how do
we allow for these experimentations to
purposefully break those silos so I'll
leave those thoughts with you and I'm
very happy to take your questions thank
you
[Applause]
to elected
how is
yeah I mean I I think so it depends I
guess you know you know if we had more
time I think you know where where the
gap is primarily to be honest with you
is actually with the professionals and
the industry often time based on my sort
of conversations is following what
they're being asked to do so even some
of the more progressive green roof
companies that were trying to push
different materials ended up with the
kind of common configuration because
they were pushed by the professionals to
specify certain materials so the
education I think needs to go back to
you know firms maybe even go back to you
know
cross-referencing things like a lead or
you know other things that allow that in
in many cases forced designers to sort
of check a box rather than think about
this more synthetically and
comprehensively and look at all the kind
of the you know interdependencies
between systems so I think that's that's
one one aspect I look at what we do and
maybe the campus as a testing ground
only in so far that it you know
seeing is believing and having demo
sites and prototypes have always proven
to be very effective in having a
cultural shift when you show people that
it works they easily change their mind
so you know given the kind of
willingness of facilities and U of T
planning to implement I mean we'll see
we've yet to see but we have built a
kind of credibility with these two
facilities so now we're you know we we
we have the relationship to do so but I
but I think that having enough kind of a
critical mass of a demonstration
demonstration sites showing that you
know this is the way forward and it's
possible and and so on you know maybe an
important step I mean another thing that
I didn't mention
so the green roof by law is for new
construction Toronto has an incentive
program which is an amazing program like
many other cities that incentivizes the
retrofit of existing programs and last I
checked since 2009 lesson 50 buildings I
mean at the time that I checked it was
like 29 so let's say there's a few more
since then but certainly of the Hun you
know I mean we're talking about the
fourth-largest city in Toronto hundreds
of buildings that you know I mean
hundreds thousands tens of thousands of
buildings that could be eligible for
green roof retrofit which would actually
aggregated together would make an
enormous impact on the urban environment
and no takers
and it's I would argue that it's not so
much a money question but it's a it's a
belief and so the culture has not really
you know really changed and that's
really where I think the main impact
would be because still relative to the
the urban footprint the new construction
since 2009 is relatively you know as a
fraction so that I think that the that
would be a real kind of major you know
forward is how to do a much more
comprehensive study and thinking about
mobilization around retrofitting and and
and through demonstration and also
through communication
so
are durable imitation of retrofitting is
and the weight of the soil
you know yes
I
our arsenal patterns should be quite
traumatic
it's a really good question I would say
you know and I don't I can't answer this
with absolute certainty because it's not
really my field but I would say that
with for new construction the load
capacity is not really an issue and and
so you can actually you you know the the
kind of loads in addition to the green
roof
they're already designed for snow loads
that are that are quite extreme and so
the green roof addition is not is not
significant in retrofit that is more of
an issue and so a few things around that
the organic media that we found was
actually a lot lighter in waist in
weight so relative to the aggregate
that's being used
I mean it's stone it's rock that there's
another argument for using the organic
media you know for for retrofit
conditions the the other thing to to
sort of consider is and and I saw this
in a project in Toronto
is looking at a sort of point loading
right so where you have columns and load
bearing walls you can actually have
deeper soil
you know maybe shallower released in
soil in the spans and thirdly you know
part of the reason that we're looking at
soil amendments is because the industry
is already moving to this what we call
how low can you go
everybody wants to go to the Sinister
and I and that makes sense because
material is money the more material you
have the more costs it will be not even
you know now withstanding structural
capacity just the material that's needed
for the green roof itself the shallower
you make it the cheaper it is and and
and so we are seeing a lot of roofs that
are actually two and a half inches you
know in depth and they're not surviving
so that's another study that we're now
doing just surveying what what's still
alive but but the the kind of looking at
again how can you make the growing media
even better as it gets shallower is is
another question that pertains to both
you know material costs and lifecycle
costs environmental impacts but also
load capacity
for retrofit I hope that answered some
of you
sure thank you so much
[Applause]
