keep working on that I'm really happy
tonight to welcome Andrew Zago principle
of Zago architecture in Los Angeles some
of you in the g2 studio are getting to
know his partner-in-crime Laura bellman
who was teaching one of the sections
there
Andrews a he's a distinguished faculty
member at sire in addition to his
practice a distinguished faculty member
at sci-arc a clinical professor at the
University of Illinois at Chicago and a
past visiting professor and longtime
friend of the Knowlton School many of
you know Andrew but for those of you
that don't I wanted to offer just a
couple of points for orientation
so to understand Andrews work it's
important to understand his deep
commitment to architecture as a
discipline and to understand that
commitment I think it's important to
understand a key distinction he is made
between the discipline and the
profession of architecture
now these line I want to show a few
lines these come from a paper that
Andrew and I wrote together a couple of
years ago and that difference goes
something like this the profession of
architecture concerns itself with the
advancement of the field as a reliable
affordable and sustainable commodity as
the profession is a service the
discipline with its advancement as an
art form it continues while those
architects active in the discipline may
well provide reliability affordability
and is sustainability it is the
discipline alone that takes
responsibility for advancing the public
imagination
so if architecture is an art form
its primary job is to fire the
imagination is to kind of project
possibilities into the future
now this is not to say that those
engaged primarily with a professional
with professional concerns do not on
occasion participate in architectures
cultural project simply that when they
do they have supplanted a professional
posture for a disciplinary one so the
point here is that if we think of
architecture is just one great big thing
we we missed some of the important
subtleties of the relationship between
our responsibilities as a profession
that is aimed at health safety and
welfare and as a discipline that is an
art form aimed at cultural production
and I think and Andrew has clarified
this relationship in a diagram this is
it
notice that the discipline is much
smaller than the profession it lies
partially outside it and it has a porous
boundary the porosity signals that some
practices like Zago architecture work at
times within and at other times outside
the discipline proper the overlap shows
that sometimes such practices work
outside the professional realm of
architecture but nonetheless still have
an effect upon it now while the
profession understood as a service to
society constitutes the bulk of the
field of architecture so most of what we
do as architects is professional work I
would say
it's the discipline that smaller
perforated circle that makes the field
go it's the discipline that propels
architecture is an art form and it is
the discipline that places architecture
on par with other art forms such as
painting literature music and film these
art forms which generally aren't seen is
offering an immediate service to society
such as shelter or functional
accommodation their primary primarily
valued for their specific disciplinary
contributions like we we we love
painting for painting we love music for
music not because music is good for you
or provide some service now given that
to so many of architectures
responsibilities lie in the professional
realm of service it's easy to forget
that our most important cultural
contributions don't come from
programmatic accommodation
but rather from our engagement with
specific disciplinary concerns from
those concerns that we advanced
architecture as an art form so if it's
easy for us to kind of sometimes forget
those concern Andrew in his work in his
teaching and I'm sure in his lecture
tonight helps us to remember that
vocation as an art practice so with that
please help me welcome Andrew Zagreb
[Applause]
thank you very much and I have a been
working away at this thing and I you
know just it's not a warning because I
think I took care of this problem one of
the first things that I do in with my
design studio is I teach my students the
word stem-winder you know because I work
very hard now to make sure I don't
deliver stem-winder so I think I once
gave a two-and-a-half-hour election
lecture at this school and it was I
think was introduced is not a situation
comedy think of it as a miniseries two
went on and on and on iswhat is there
somewhere I can plug this I'm just would
hate to have the thing die out while I'm
talking but I think I think I can be
fairly effect I'm going to switch some
other classes I think I can be briefed
to do that I'm gonna touch on a lot of
different topics and I'll try not to go
into any one in in too much depth but
hopefully they they tie together and and
it's it comes down to exactly this
current work which is like three slides
three minutes literally what's on the
table in the office right now what's the
difference and for Sara Hirshman this is
not the same lecture that I gave at
Berkeley it's similar but I've inserted
another lecture into the middle of it so
and still edit it down not to be a
stem-winder so this is nice and then
footnotes on color and that part the
footnotes our brief invite me out for
another lecture I know it has been
decades that you've done the Baumer
series and you know I'm not I realize
I'm not of that caliber yet but perhaps
someday
I will simply be showing projects where
I was invited to do project for the
Museum of Modern Art for the Venice
architecture Biennale and a marquee
project for the Chicago Architecture
biennial but I'm not the bomber yet I
understand I got oh I'm working on it
this is the interview great so this is
this is what I'm going to show the first
one again it this is it what we're
working on right now part one current
work we have two different projects that
were working on for info Navi the
housing agency of Mexico the federal
agency projects that are kind of very
dear to us they're tiny tiny projects
this was for a rural community calm
nanika milpa
these are these are six hundred and
thirty six hundred and fifty square foot
houses to be built for a few thousand
dollars literally by the owners
themselves this was selected as one of a
group of projects that are actually now
being built right now the site is being
graded as part of an exposition park in
Eid algo State that was curated by moss
by Michael Meredith and Hilary samples
so this is this is coming it says
concrete block this is the second one
for the city of Durango and this is
where they they know they have these
little single-family homes that they
financed and they exist by the millions
like carpeting around the outskirts of
most Mexican cities there a lot of them
are failing and somehow we get involved
with fail housing projects so it's to
take a single family home and shoehorn
retail and on the ground floor of which
there are none in these neighborhoods
and then four units inside of it so this
was really a great exercise for us in a
kind of sort of early modernist minimal
housing model and looking through those
typology really carefully and seeing
some of the ways in which you can get a
maximum amount of quality of dwelling
space for very little means the third
one is a very peculiar project we're
working on an office for an architect in
the city of Keller dash'd in Iran and it
is almost the same size as the other one
six meter six and a half meters wide it
is a cantilevered kind of asterisk that
goes between two walls with a little
patio out the back this is uh just
finishing schematic design right now
okay so part two what's the difference
this is what I wanted to talk about
there's a an interest in in our work we
work a lot on architecture as Todd
mentioned a lot often it's I wouldn't
say we are we're certainly not urban
designers or urban planners but a lot of
times our work deals with architecture
as an urban agent or in a kind of urban
field and so the the general thought of
urbanism and its relationship to
architecture is certainly something that
we think about a lot and we've been
interested in I suppose let's say
heterogeneous conditions as a
contemporary condition of architecture
and also of urbanism and so I put
together a few sketches and actually I
put these together really on the fly in
preparation for this Berkeley lecture
but I thought it would be useful to show
it to you here I think a lot of you know
this book it was very rare and now it's
back in print Albert Albert Pope's book
ladders and he describes basically two
different models of urbanism I I won't
go into depth but basically saying that
there is a kind of urbanism of
conventional American urbanism which
characterizes most cities up until the
middle of the 20th century and that is
the connected grid which interestingly
enough could be Manhattan could be
Chicago could be Los Angeles he put some
structurally together and says that it
basically allows a great degree of
freedom and any number of ways of moving
and reconnecting throughout that city
and then puts the other the second model
the latter model is coming essentially
from Europe and lays it at the foot of
one person
I think Ludwig Hilbert Siemer who worked
very closely with Mies van der Rohe and
later goes to IIT with him in in Chicago
this idea of a hierarchical system and
you all know this if you go to suburban
areas and Columbus I'm sure if you go
from a house on a cul-de-sac to a
collector Street to an arterial street
to a freeway to another collector street
to a little parking
lot to store inside of a strip mall
right you can't there's not ten ways of
getting there like you want to get from
59th and Park to another part of
Manhattan it's a ladder you go up and
down this hierarchical system and he
talks about is is this this breakdown of
a kind of urban space and interesting I
think from our point of view all three
of the projects I'm going to show you
I think our legacies of this and the one
in fact I'll come back to this project
directly an urban plan by Hilbert Shimer
working with Mies and Detroit but so
what you have is you have the suburban
model of it the cul-de-sac subdivision
and the shopping centers and and the
kind of streets out there and he also
talks about the the implosion of it
within cities if you know Hilbert
Summers projects for for Chicago and
other places where this kind of ladder
hierarchical method structure to a city
gets implanted into a urbanism this is
very much a kind of microcosm of it is
Lafayette Park in Detroit they rip out a
continuous grid structure and then lay
in instead this which is which is on a
grid which is rectangular
it seems similar morphologically it is
in fact a lovely lovely project if you
were to characterize how you move
through it and how it disconnects and
the surrounding streets it would very
much be the latter typology and not the
other so we were looking at a couple of
different examples there seems to be in
the in the latter part of the 20th
century and creating increasing
intuitions about heterogeneous
conditions that one wouldn't describe as
exactly either of these two things so
this is something that I think has been
kind of back in circulation sort of with
the vengeance in the last few years
which is the green archipelago or
mongers and and and colleagues working
in 1977 where he envisions the city of
Berlin as a city as a as a collection of
architectural prototypical fragments
surrounded by nature and so that's
that's the model I would I find
interesting about this drawing is even
though it is on this open field what it
would have in
and with both the and maybe it's just an
artifact of the drawing what it has in
common with both the Manhattan grid and
the Lafayette Park is that they are
still based on a grid regardless of
their their layout and and then again
maybe more interesting to me because of
the more greater degree of difference
between the individual components let's
say in John Hajduk doing his victims
projects ten years or so later even
where it seems like suddenly one of the
buildings seems to be an axonometric so
even the it starts to bounce out of even
one continuous let's say spatial model
laying over the whole thing nonetheless
you note in the background that there is
at this point nearly disappeared the
point grid of the city so I think there
is still with both of these models the
the high degree of object heterogeneity
but there still is this idea I would
argue of a homogeneous let's say medium
or ether into which they're they're
inserted something that's probably much
more in closer to what we're talking
about is is the famous analogous city
that Aldo Rossi and his colleagues did
in in nineteen seventy six and if you
imagine this not just as a drawing but
as a city plan what I find interesting
is the fact that not just an axonometric
but there's a series of fundamentally
different drawing types embedded within
the same plan and so you have the
naturalistic hatching of the mountains
you have actually a sketch a loose
sketch you have the perspective of the
various geometric objects coming in the
into the foreground and then various
forms of plans so here they coexist and
it seems like there isn't this kind of
background but they actually formulate a
series of the space itself becomes one
of the agents wildly different scales
are at work here as well and so I would
discuss in that that
a long-standing discussion that I've had
with with Jeff Kipnis about works like
David saleh's and and the term that Jeff
uses sometimes there's multiple ontology
x' I don't I decided ontology is a bad
word to use in architecture these days
so I call it a bunch of different stuff
put together but in in David Sally's
work and and maybe in a more reduced
that may be more useful form in the
paintings of Jonathan Lasker those of
you that know it and in the sense of
ontology is that there's a number of
different things that exist here each of
which belong not only in their own means
of technique their own spatial
preconditions their own sense of how a
painting operates in the world their own
sense of how does the stroke of the
paint is applied and it doesn't it's a
it's a very unusual idea one of the
things that one notes about architecture
I noticed this trying to do things out
of a lot of different things is whatever
one's inclinations and interests you
think of a project as has being one
thing and there's a kind of logic to
that project the idea that it has
fundamentally more than one built into
it really goes countered and it is it is
actually a very tough intuition to kind
of override and some of the projects I'm
gonna show you are some of our effects
at that so what I find interesting than
looking within architecture I've kind of
readapted this project the World Trade
Center proposal by by Peter and Gwathmey
Richard Meyer and Steven Holl sure a lot
of you know it it was not the one that
made the news the ones that were all
swoopy made the news I remember having a
meeting with Harry Cobb who's been doing
commercial towers since you know before
I was born
saying he looked at all of them this is
the only radical one because they put
public space open public space into the
middle of a developer towers the other
ones are just different shapes I thought
this was interesting I also imagined in
another form thinking back at those
models that this could also be seen as a
sudden category shift that this idea of
the background neutral grid of the city
unto which one places objects whether
they're separate objects are scattered
like in the Hajduk and the oil mongers
here you would actually it would be like
a terrible misunderstanding that you
take a piece of the grid that's supposed
to be the background and you suddenly
rotate it 90 degrees and make it into a
gigantic building and so this that in in
in my reading of it it's even more
interesting than Harry Cobb suggests
there's a plan for it and so if if it
were this case where one could start to
swap out certain qualities and scales
where suddenly there isn't a stable
ground of this is the background onto
which we get to have our ways but the
background the infrastructure of it
becomes implicated as well then suddenly
it gives a new meaning to the famous
intentionally the famous cartoon that
was intended to be quite derisive of a
doleful OSes building in Vienna where
they said well he must have
misunderstood this manhole cover and
thought it was a facade and I'm thinking
yes that's a great idea
can we just I'll work on that so this
was the diagram that you would have an
urban grid and then you would have the
Hilbert Cymer ladder which still
operates within that grid but you get
the little cloud of trees around it and
then with the lumping together
Hajduk and Unger's with apologies to
both that there are two various Berlin
projects as having this thing versus the
one that we have at the bottom so trying
to imagine this is like when you draw a
fight scene in an Andy Capp cartoon
you could google it I'll tell you
there's I wanna do this that means you
can Google what I'm talking about so we
were looking at this and we worked on it
I worked on it through some Studios Todd
knows some of this work quite well quite
well and I think is was it on some of
these reviews we got very interested in
this game set which you know if you know
what you're either a very enlightened
parent or your parents were very
enlightened because it greatly increases
your child's IQ
I think if they play this enough and and
it would just raise your hand if you
know this game enough of you know okay
it's a very peculiar game because we're
trying to figure out how do you
construct these similarities and these
differences our working theory is like
with sat you have to find three cards I
won't get into it but there has to be
various qualities that are all the same
or all exactly different that be exactly
different or exactly the same and so
there's some solutions that you get by
looking at it three different shapes
same fill same color same quantity and
other ones same set you get this one
every single quality is different three
different numbers three different colors
three different fills three different
shapes these are the really hard ones
that see there's some that you see and
you make the connections visually others
you have to think about and so we
thought it was this kind of combination
of things that you see in things that
you think about is our kind of working
model so for better or worse that's the
end of it this was something my
colleague Marceline Gow pulls us out and
showed just in a lecture and and I love
this and this is the more haze that's
supposedly from this this encyclopedia a
lost encyclopedia of a Chinese emperor
and this is like wanting animals those
that belong to the amp I won't read them
all but you know suckling pigs stray
dogs those drawn with a very fine camel
hairbrush those that have just broken a
flower vaz so it's as if each one is in
a different list world a little bit like
the David Saleh and they don't they all
each one of those would project off into
a different logic entirely and you
wouldn't
imagine the next one being part of it
and the way that they're put together is
is the idea so three projects and I will
go very quickly through these all of
them two of the three are actually all
three are based on scenarios that don't
work anymore so one of the things that
we do and this was what we did for a
moment this was in the in the depth of
the foreclosure crisis looking at failed
suburbs Barry bergdoll
was a curator and Reinhold Martin was
the kind of think tank behind it what
can you do with these failed suburbs if
the federal reinvestment program of 2010
2009 was applied towards them rather
than these other kinds of infrastructure
projects paint a new scenario so we
found this gigantic subdivision in
Southern California that had failed it
had been a victim of this two hundred
and twenty four thousand homes 10% of it
was built it was in bankruptcy so he
proposes extremely elaborate scenario on
the belief that this gets maybe back to
Todd's diagram that there's a
responsibility for a certain kind of
engagement in the world with projects
but that we should believe our own as
Bob soma would say we should believe our
own diagrams in our own disciplinary
obsessions not as our private little
interests that we need to be quiet about
or ashamed about but believe that we
could actually project that their their
projective that we put them in the world
and they can actually reorganize some of
these problems we did it here and we
solved it although now when you fly over
into LA you can see this thing and it's
finished it seems to be doing fine and
so even without our innovative
groundbreaking so this was what Reinhold
Martin this is another this is almost a
lecture into itself what they were
saying as we look at the American dream
and you it is it is the way it looks is
a product of all sorts of forces that
shape it the ideology the finances etc
that gives us what the American Dream is
the suburban single-family home blah
blah blah if you change it you'll change
the city and what we stand by 100% is it
is exactly the opposite the
you you changed it this is the form of
the thing itself that causes new dreams
and this is maybe a little bit related
so that's what we said just to be
contrarians
this is at Rialto it's way out in the
middle if any of you know the so called
Inland Empire in our so out of Los
Angeles warehouses and this is where now
all you know through the through the
early part of the century and the last
century where the carpeting of new
suburban houses was being laid in in Los
Angeles increasingly up against quite
extreme natural environments of the the
Sierras in this case and we had a Lydell
creek running through it we thought this
was the end of it and they were trying
to figure out what the hell to do as I
mentioned they're doing quite well right
now but it was this really interesting
thing where everything was gone it was
it was stalled but all of the
infrastructure was built all of the
grading was done the streets were laid
out and so we just and this is it you
literally look in the backyard and
there's you know coyotes and and eagles
and all sorts of natural type things out
there these are some of the model homes
but most of it 99 percent ninety percent
of it looked like this just graded steps
and this is its product so what we
worked on and this was this idea and
I'll just did that the actual project
has many components I'll go through that
quickly but the idea was that we thought
we are we have certain to some questions
that we call disciplinary night you know
we use this word I always have tell me
doesn't mean punishing people it's not
that kind of disciplinary right this is
the other kind that we had a number of
interest and we would somehow find some
way of putting these together we were
quite interested in the relaxation of
qualities with an object that an object
it's geometry its
regularity of appearance the beginning
and end of materials on it they'll
coincide is a set of factors and they
all coincide and reinforce the same
thing and we've been interested in
loosening those let's say and we call it
miss registration and so this is what we
applied to this and we talked to a
number of people we were working with an
ecologist and economists and and it
turns out these subdivisions are mono
complete mono Ecology's monocultures in
terms of and you can see it here this is
public this is private this is mine this
is yours
that's nature this is this is a garden
this is the building this is the ground
so it's all based on for a whole series
of reasons you take a bit of Southern
California scrub land and you ley lines
on top of it line after line and those
lines tell you what everything is and
this is we thought was a root of the
problem everybody has about the same
income you know all of the the you know
outside nature is stopped etc etc and so
we propose was this not to completely
eliminate these but to simply miss
register them and so you end up with not
only binary conditions but secondary and
tertiary conditions of this as well
so there were new opportunities for
ownership new opportunities for the
infiltration of ecosystems into the into
the building and funny ways in which the
walls melt onto the ground and vice
versa the financial model was brilliant
but seems to have gone forward without
us
I won't go you know part of it we looked
very much at the the ladder diagrams
because this this would be a classic
example of the ex urban after diagram of
Albert Pope and so we rewired it so it
doesn't work like a cul-de-sac scheme
anymore and took the big arterial road
and instead turned it into a nature
corridor you know so the San Bernadino
kangaroo rat could run through there and
the elephants is another story but
Pleistocene rewilding it's a real thing
and they talked about bringing elephants
to Southern California worked with our
friends at Arab so the whole thing
rather than each house existing
individually there was a large shared
energy and water distribution plant
reworked the construction in itself of
with with sips panels but the whole site
underwent a Miss registration and so the
house types would start to stutter and
iterate and and mutate into more
buildings we didn't want to be anti
suburban but we it's about a hundred and
fifty percent increase in the density of
it but many many more types duplexes row
houses etc that come about and then what
happens with the paving the ownership
etc and the elephants see that's there's
a on my website there's a video that
explains the elephants and then going
through this is you know we work on a
lot of cheese at boxes and shift it and
shift it onto the ground and try to just
figure out not just it is Atkins kind of
conceptual model economic model land
ownership model ecological but also as
an architectural model
I won't this is a longer discussion of
it so but this is experiments in the
house form we take a lot of models I was
talking with some of the students today
this was a kind of early early kind of
rendering our kind of midterm we were
doing this meetings at ps1 and then the
show eventually opened at MoMA so the
site plan here hard to see and some
details of it so you can see existing
homes the iterated kind of stuttering
homes the various kinds of surfaces and
green spaces moving through it here's a
model of a small portion of it the
courtyards that break into the home this
is just a handful of types but all the
variety comes from the mix as you can
see here subtle variation so there could
be an accessory unit to a main house or
it can be a full duplex on this
discussion of the topologies
and then the model and obviously there's
other features from that thing and from
the modeled and some of the things that
we were talking about and that would be
my footnotes
that's the moat to keep the elephant
separate
in a section we see the outside pieces
becoming interior sort of the opposite
you know the Southern California model
if you know the Schindler house or
others is that private space goes
outside and you have you're kind of
living room is outside we sort of did
the opposite what if the public space
actually came in and and curled in and
you would have in an incursion of public
space into there this is a film that I'm
not going to show other than to say Todd
shows up a bunch of times and his child
taiko shows up like 40 times thanks to
the miracles of software and we've got
Jeff there's the elephant and and
playing with the elephant somewhere has
been Nicholson he shows up in here
there's Ben Nicholson a lot of cameos oh
yeah just say there's Joe say he's here
- where is he
you were here
there's the late aircon like Dear
Colleague yeah where is it hang on I'm
not gonna let this go by well you could
find this one on my website also Joe
stays in here anyway
you keep getting the royalty checks
right Jim was sweeping yeah yeah that's
good he gets one for each time he was
copy and paste it in there so the
footnote on color is this is this is the
part that will could easily be a longer
lecture I'm teaching a couple of classes
and I have been for a while on this
predating this was a series of
experiments that we were making with the
limits of legibility of images for a
variety of reasons and thinking of it as
facade elevation problems and all of
these would would work with a set of
product boxes and then through a
procedure of tiling this is not digital
this is just cutting things together and
putting them together we would come up
with these other things that are you
know there were some interest to us and
we now have we're almost near the end of
this series it's been kind of in the
background for several years or at
around
thirty-five of these I think are 40 in
various sizes but the other thing and
this also comes from a couple of
discussions with with Jeff is is the
quip once that why is it that in
painting color can make atmosphere in
space but in architecture it always
either just reinforces the volume and
surface or is used as a code you know I
can shoo me let's say and I always
thought that's interesting add a little
bit of background in painting I
understood it quite well and so I
thought even though that wasn't the
intention with these that we started to
get into an area where there was even
though it's hard there's no transparency
or anything else in this but there is a
kind of atmosphere to it you know this
goes exactly the the lecture would would
go from Jeff back to the classic
division between design you and kahlúa
that some of you might know well others
don't you can google that I don't Google
I invented this distinction I called one
the you know the Piero della Francesca
versus George Oni battle where one is
lines and the lines would get filled in
it had to do with being fresco the other
one being paint oil paint being applied
directly and in transparent layers over
a period of time directly on the canvas
so it was fresco paintings the
predominance of geometry a lot of
architects painters working in Florence
the other was Venice it was fresco
doesn't work well because too humid they
develop oil painting on canvas and the
idea of direct application of color and
buildup of atmospheres architect has
always been in the first camp so I you
know I think it's in our DNA we can't
simply suggest atmospheres of materials
somewhere it has to be here it has to be
there and we have drawings to prove it
and to make sure it comes out that way
sort of the reason for that well we
tried to go in anyways and see if we
could have our way with it when I get
further on I'll say something about
printing technology and where that comes
in so all I want to say is we weren't
thinking obviously we're thinking a lot
about color when we were working
the moma project we were trying to build
up things like underpainting etc and and
spending a lot of time on these kinds of
studies both of color and of pattern I
don't think we had an exact method of
working through the atmosphere effects
but these are just some of the studies
outtakes from that and and in particular
in addition to we also had birds and
cages for some reason and so a model
like this from that one begins to
suggest maybe something more of the
atmosphere when we when we showed this
project in New York almost
simultaneously Prada unveils their 2013
collection and I thought okay we're on
the right track
clearly secret memos must have been
exchanged between moles in my office
second project the architectural
imagination this was just finished
touring it was in Venice and it was in
Detroit and then it was in Los Angeles
today and the museum just closed a
couple months ago this was pavilion
organized by Cynthia Davison and Monica
Ponce de Leon invited twelve architects
to look at four sites in Detroit and
each one each site would have three
architects in fact Albert Pope and his
colleague was one of the teams back in
Merrell the architect the architects for
this fantastic building were another one
then Laura and I were the other one
you Todd already mentioned Laura I'm
showing these projects myself laura has
the good sense to be on a plane right
now back to Los Angeles so she doesn't
need to hear me talk but needless to say
these are all done in in partnership and
I think pretty much since the moment
project we've been working that way so
we were given Detroit some of you may
know this and the idea was we need new
great imaginations for Detroit both
Lauren are natives of Detroit I had an
office there for a number of years as a
lot of you know I I've had studios from
OSU come up and visit when I was there
and so I know I know
we know Detroit all too well it's
interesting to want a giant project of
the imagine a
but like with the other project it's not
that simple like we didn't do the
foreclosed project without some serious
reengineering of the whole idea of what
we were going to do there
and you know the same thing happened to
Detroit in my long history
michael--ah Cadwell you'll remember well
I had that little spa right up there I
was the highest our office in the city
bill this is an old picture the Hudsons
department store got demolished and lots
of things lots of things change we're
working on another but I didn't show
we're working in a project now across
the street from that these clients are
they're renovating that square and we've
got a couple of projects we're working
with someone I set up my window and
imagine it now it's sort of happening so
I'll say bad things about Detroit but
things are also happening we've been
working for a long time studying it
these were studies of corner bank
buildings that we had done a number of
years Bank back studies I find him all
in photographing and recording what they
had become we found all of them Laura
and I so this is you know because of our
history there's a few things first off
we did this for an organization called
greening of Detroit and it's sitting
there you see in the background there
that is one of the Mies van der Rohe
towers from Lafayette Park I think it's
not a it's not a nothing relationship
between the two but that's where it is
relative to downtown my office would
have been in the center there were the
streets meet this is the Lafayette Park
project the Ludwig Hilbert's heimer was
the urban designer and Mies van der Rohe
the architect and then this is the site
that we were given it's the old Eastern
Market site any of you noted from
Detroit here no one my god it's really
not that far
it's it's why I taught here is really
funny I gave all of my nephew's Ohio
State t-shirts because my family is like
totally U of M's I thought it was I
thought it was funny so we have this
site so we I concocted this formula
there's Gratiot that divides the two
it's the street that goes from the
center of the city it's a it's an
extension of the Woodward plan of
Detroit which is quite an important plan
and it comes through here it divides us
and so I came up with this formula
azhagu architecture over Ludwig
Hilbert's himer plus Mies van der Rohe
this was our project and there it is
there's the Mesa project so this is a
city fathers old governor Milliken
they're not impressed and there they are
they're looking at this is not a little
bit I just have my wrong glasses on
that's pretty much 95 98 percent there
so this is it here and I thought you
know what they're really laughing at
they're pointing further on somebody
it's gonna get that sight and so we as I
said we know Detroit it's a big empty
lot and you know what there's thousands
of them the old cities like that it's
not empty because no one has come up
with that you know there's an empty lot
in the middle of Chicago it's because
they're angling for which various
projects might go there and which money
comes together here there's nothing to
do there really isn't anything to do we
work with David Bergman who we work with
MoMA as well he was saying you you
there's nothing in the economic system
or needs within Detroit that makes a
project you need an exogenous shock and
so we thought about exogenous shocks and
this was around the time this is the
Fantasyland there we used to have a
president who thought we could make a
nominal increase in the number of
refugees allowed into the United States
in lieu of the the truly horrendous
refugee crisis caused by the war in
Syria and there was going to be an
increase it was a significant increase
for the US wouldn't have made hardly a
dent and the whole thing but nonetheless
that was the case we started thinking
about and realizing that Detroit
as one of the largest middle-eastern
metropolitan Detroit the Larten not the
the largest middle-eastern community in
the United States Lebanese Syrians Iraqi
long-standing and continues to grow and
we thought what if we can we just bring
a bunch of immigrant a bunch of our
immigrants refugees here so I google it
and it turns out there was a paper of
this professor David Leyden who's that
Sanford had just had written an op-ed
piece in New York Times that I had
missed just saying exactly that so I
thought again like the prod I thought
this must be a good idea this office I
contacted him he was very excited his
wife not practicing but she had actually
gone to IIT he knew the biennial he said
he just made his proposal never kind of
thought through the consequences so we
worked with them and fought through what
kind of quantities do we need what's the
mechanisms in terms of various agencies
to make this happen so it would be a
long story like the one for for MoMA but
the upshot was that the pavilion is
actually sponsored by the US State
Department so we proposed that we said
what we're doing is an open letter and
we showed it does the letter we wrote to
John Kerry John Phillips who's the
American ambassador to Italy was there
and we presented it him to make sure
tell John or maybe he doesn't check his
mailbox every day but he's got a letter
we think he can I want to we never heard
doc I don't know how do you do open
letters I don't know clearly I don't
know it's the without getting into the
numbers the mechanism was simple a
number of people are settled in places
because they have a family connection
the rest are just distributed around the
country we said let's go back to the
great days of federal projects that's
what we call this a new federal project
the courthouses like when Ed finer was
running the GSA building excellence
let's build some great buildings that
the government shows that we can do this
and we can we we built goddamn freeways
we do all of these other things let's do
this so we said what if we just said
we're gonna combine international good
with an urban experiment in urban
regeneration and for a period of five
years concentrate all of the refugees
that are not naturally going somewhere
else into one city which is Detroit it
would be about 65,000 refugees
and we did there's various spreadsheets
that we did for this and and this is
what it came down to we know the kind of
joke you know the the joke I know the
the you know the term decimate there's a
lot of people who hate it when people
use that term to meet total annihilation
it's a it's a term from ancient Rome it
means to reduce by 1/10 so if you had a
rest of population somewhere to teach
them a lesson you would just arbitrarily
take every tenth person and kill them
plenty left there's ninety percent of
you are left just don't do that again ok
so that's what it means to decimate
someone so we thought we'd try to find
the opposite I'm not sure if it's a
tithing but we took 65,000 people is 10%
of the current population of Detroit and
what's it add 10% in the process over
five years
you can quickly naturalize you have to
otherwise they send you back then you
can move wherever the hell you want
because this is back then it's a free
country
so it's not that we said it's not like
this is captive audience but you build
an infrastructure for this wave that
comes through and then over it just
simply stays there as various kinds of
infrastructure for Detroit and and also
conceit you know that almost certainly
would add to a bunch of people a small
what Detroit used to be what it is now
and then the orange is what we're adding
plenty of room plenty of room I won't go
through that it used to look like this
around our site just how is this
side-by-side and so we identified this
area next to us and we said ok we're
working on this area we are not really
designing this we just did some number
crunching and looked at blank Lots
imagine the scenario of what would be
called friendly eminent domain where you
don't have to sell out but we'd give a
good price to people are just land
banking and figure you know would take
about that much housing is what 65,000
as they cycle through in the years would
do now we have and then we thought ok
now we can do a project ok you got all
of these people they're coming in in
five years they have all their needs now
we can conceive of what to do with your
empty spot
and it's it is an urban version of some
of those things I was diagramming for
you so to take the the site itself and
this reduced thing and first off seeing
if you could kind of iterate the urban
grid in place I keep thinking of you
know coal with a K like the thing that
Johnny Depp wears in the pirates movies
I'm talking about right where you just
these are these are some of the studies
for it but I'll go into these this is a
kind of idea of the kind of
constellation of pieces and and this is
it and all of them have a life now and a
life later this you can't see here this
is Eastern Market a hundred years plus
of wholesale and weekend green grocer
sheds its great is one of the only
places you go to Detroit it's filled
with everybody from all over the you
know in the city outside of the city it
is a crossroad so we proposed a new food
hall here topiary a bio scale this is a
kind of generation plan here again
working with Arab what we call the big
flat building which starts off as uh
various kinds of warehouses and then can
become creative office space the big
Federal Building officetel and then a
small office tower and these have
relationships to one another and here
you see the pieces in the site model one
thing I just want to mention we what we
do now when we work on a project we
usually set up a mood board in the
office and it's changing this is I think
like like I think Prada does this right
clothing designers they said it's all
gonna be about so we do this and and
these are an ever-changing this is what
we were looking at on the kind of
analytic side and this is what we were
looking at it the kind of atmospheric
side of the project
it goes on much longer than this but I'd
like to take snapshots of it as we go
along
and so we have then these urban
fragments we have them both there not
only the Hilbert's himer we have this
kind of grid that I was showing you
highlighted in orange and then this
enormous and absolutely unnecessary
little freeway spur that they're talking
about closing and so we take that for
our first building and we decide well
you close this thing and we're very
interested in this urban morphology in
contrast to the that's like the post-war
Albert Pope and that's a pre-war and
we're gonna take that little unwrapped
off-ramp and turn it into one of the
halls and that's it there used to be a
hall there right there
there's the city and so this is it kind
of a winter gardens there's some of the
study models for the week like a KA the
squiggle building these are the squiggle
studies these are all these are actually
plans of 3d Rhyno models none of them
are actual expressionistic sketches
heaven forbid
and they said
these are the I mean I'll go I can talk
about all these buildings at length but
I'll go through them quickly this
topiary which assists it's it's part of
that mathematical equation see of one
part of the city and the other working
with this group called greening of
Detroit who did that pavilion for us
they have a big farm also here and we
thought we would have a kind of job
training core this is the the Schonbrunn
palace in Vienna do what these amazing
so we thought why don't it's in the
middle of Detroit you built one of these
this would be kind of amazing so that's
that's the plan for these those trees
there are supposed to be cut like that
the bioswale and then these little kind
of cast of Three Stooges this is the big
flat building which is a warehouse the
whole roof is ETFE pillows with a
fretted diaphragm that can cut the light
or let the light in
they're relatively cheap as it turns out
and so this can function is if a bunch
of you'll come in and they need to put
in cots for emergency sleeping or get
supplies they can take classes there
they can use it for storage eventually
these things become museums creative
office space whatever we don't we're not
spelling out what they become later and
it's got a very complex set of possible
subdivisions with within it that so you
could open it and close it and then
something this is a drawing I did in
Rome back in 2002 the Palazzo Farnese II
those of you taking notes and so we
imagine the building that was then as if
you know let's say in our idiosyncratic
reading of the Ground Zero project by
Eisenman & Company that if a piece of
the grid suddenly became animate and
misbehaved
so the thing that's lying on the ground
is also at a different scale up in the
air and this is the officetel that is to
say live work for and and si NGOs that
might come there to deal with all of the
transitional period for the refugees and
then it becomes a small like boutique
hotel
sloped floors in the corridor and then
the rooms are cast-in-place concrete and
then the sister building that goes with
it is very much based on the same kind
of grid but let's say the physics of the
grid completely changes and it's a
little 13 story office building study
models
a lot of study models
and this is it it's brick I mean the
models themselves in each case are quite
large and are meant to have a kind of
presence this takes like two people to
lift this
and then for that last haul these are
some of the study models for it I'll
show you in the next project more of
these models and try to justify our arts
and crafts sessions
in fact this project in the next project
which is the last one which is a
Performing Arts Center for University of
Illinois in Chicago almost working on
them at the same time when we had a
bunch of study models and two exhibits
we found out we sent some of this wrong
study models to the wrong wrong City
there it is an inside there's a series
of we were mostly working on these and
the exterior the interior was not very
developed of any of these but this was a
you know library classrooms performance
space etc for yes al you know whatever
you need a huge project with refugees is
you get a lot of perfekt you get a lot
of professionals that come over it turns
out they always end up any refugee
community almost always ends up
increasing the local economy and being a
boon to the benefit to the local economy
hard to believe it's true one of the big
problems professionals come and then
they don't have any way of adjusting
their credentials to do what they're
supposed to do an engineer a doctor
whatever and so they end up driving cabs
or you know which doesn't work out so
well anymore so part of it is a big
retraining for people and
recertification for people that's what
happens in that building so the the
footnote on color so the things that we
were showing you before done with the
little boxes they morphed into something
else thinking exactly about this idea of
kahlúa the atmospheric use of color and
trying to see this is where color
printing comes and really spending a lot
of time looking at printing if any of
you know Richard Benson's the the
printed picture is a great book in a
series of gallery talks that he gives
online you know in in in printing you
want atmosphere in grey tones and color
tones and you're really working in kind
of in a binary word world whether it's
an etching and engraving whether it's
for CMYK printing it has to be this
thought and not that so we started
thinking through that a lot looking a
lot at Seurat paintings as well to
figure out what it meant to have local
pallets and and to produce other colors
from those pallets and and these were
the studies that that we made from that
so it's it's trying to get
atmosphere of color that would
characterize Colo de painting but to do
it through the means of design you which
is to say you could make a kind of
tectonics of it and there
these are laser-cut studies there
they're this big and so we thought of
this as a skin treatment for this
building and and when we went ahead with
that so this this is where it's just a
different we work on colouring and we've
worked on all that complicated urbanism
and here they come together I guess
that's it then here's the model and you
see the squiggles become a kind of
league motif on the ground also and
there you see the thick the thick piece
so it's like crown becomes like a giant
fat cartoon of itself put on top of
itself like a like over overdone
eyeshadow and there you see how this
thing is constructed it's a very
delicate skin this big in the section
and there you see them that's something
I think the thing that drove Monica and
Cynthia crazy we're supposed to have a
site plan on the table this is it in
Venice not only is another site plan
each model was a different scale it's
like but they're already done there's
like though it's fine it's fine so
they're all kind of the same size
they're all different scales though and
there's one of the studies on the back
way this is installed in Venice and that
gets Michael and Hilary's project in the
background
okay and the last project which is the
visual Performing Arts do it okay time
whiz okay right okay and this is a we
were asked a few faculty or practicing
architects we're asked to do proposals
for the Visual and Performing Arts
Center for Chicago UIC as Todd mentioned
is where I teach we kind of went very
far with hours probably unnecessarily so
but nonetheless so this is the UIC
campus so this is now the third model of
the Albert Pope urbanism in the first
one it's literally the the cul-de-sac
subdivision off of the freeway off of
the arterial road out in XAR BIA in the
Lafayette Park it's literally the Ludwig
Hilbert's heimer placed in in this case
this is Walter nach there's the site but
Walter netsch of som doing this the
campus you know this used to be called a
circle campus which is what I knew it
originally and does anyone know why it's
called the circle Kent what's called a
circle campus because it was convenient
to the giant freeway intersection see
the circle there so they actually is the
only camp is it they named after a
freeway interchange like that big crazy
thing that you saw in Detroit this is
you know but this is one that connects
all of Chicago 1994 with whatever but it
was really like take this was a just
like Lafayette Park that was a finely
grained historic african-american
community called Black Bottom this was
an italian-american community with all
his little blocks and little buildings
and so unlike the the scrubland know
there's Walter Knight it looks like a
cool dude I never met him he just died a
few years ago did you know him at all
Jos a niche so looks like cool
looks like pulse Bolton isn't he yeah
just like his former student who worked
on that moment he's a Paul is the one
that did that brilliant axonometric from
MoMA he's a quite quite a talented guy
so this was it the famous pebble dropped
in the water into the pond this was
really this idea that parking lots
here's the freeway
busts a blue line parking lot parking
lot and it's completely loose at the
edges and it comes in to a central
corridor so this is very much that kind
of diagram we certainly didn't have an
opportunity to re-engineer the diagram
but what we were suddenly tasked with
doing is providing what was supposed to
been a loose edge with a decidedly hard
point there so this was interesting and
and this is Bob Solow as only Bob somal
can do they made a proposal for the
Obama Presidential Library a beautiful
proposal I think you can find it online
one of the things they did is you all
know the bernam the great Birnam plan of
Chicago and that we're all the streets
meet there was an accident there was
this enormous building which I think may
have been the city hall they lay that
over the city map and they say oh it's
exactly here it turns out if you built a
platform over the freeway right next to
you I see we are actually the center of
Chicago we're not the suburban campus
anymore they didn't get it
University of Chicago got it strange
building to be sure but they thought
what we do have a hot site on our hands
let's do something there there it is and
it pulls together all of the various
arts and performing arts and
architecture architecture is the bottom
right very peculiar building and so
again we we had we went through arts and
crafts and really because this was this
idea was saying before the idea of
making something in which the logic it
has fundamentally different logics a
kind of schizophrenic project is
difficult and so we got into some quite
questionable territory with our models I
think the only time we've had pipe
cleaner models and I have a bunch of
these I'll just show them I mean at some
point really coming into the office and
saying arts and crafts are over
we can sculpt the clay this is pasta
spray-painted
[Music]
I don't have any these are so what it is
is they're the central building there is
a series of theaters from a black box to
a work astre hall with a couple of
others in between and then there's a
number of practice rooms art studios
offices etc we finally started thinking
that we could make all of the
performance spaces into a tower which
suddenly gives the campus real
visibility from downtown Sears Tower
Willis Tower is not very far and then
the second building would hold the other
various pieces and so every permutation
was experimented with they're not
exactly sequential but ish it's a
perennial favorite by the way
a little bit like an elephant
so then we start to put them together
into a one building at thinking of it on
a plinth which didn't in the end make
sense if they needed more proximity and
so instead of this
[Music]
we start to gang them up like this
and then begin working through this
relationship there was always this when
you do these kinds of buildings that we
say we wish there were a lot of informal
places where people could just perform
and uses one kind of space or another
and so we just thought why don't we
actually make something which we call
the fifth theater this is the tower for
the Performing Arts this you know so
this and that tower in the in the Venice
they were their close cousins they were
being worked on at the same time so here
you see the relationship of two things
and then this thing in the middle of the
kind of chewing gum stuck between it
being this other circulation piece that
is the entry hall what do you called me
called it outside of a theater where
you're hanging out intermission and you
have a glass of wine that's the word
thank you I always these technical terms
I always get caught on it would be a
kind of Lobby would be a circulation so
students and people who come they could
see each other they would all mix in the
thing that's blue here and that it we
you know because of lots of things they
do with experimental music and have a
long history of it we thought it would
actually have acoustical properties and
we would tune it and we worked with
these brilliant acoustic people at the
arab lab in in chicago and and this is
it all put together so you see here it's
right along the freeway there's a long
bar that that way when you're on the
campus it's not like you're along the
freeway so there's a kind of back wall
against it these buildings that stack up
like various kinds of blocks
there's Performing Arts tower where the
skin can open up and then this thing
that we call the fifth theater which is
like someone opened up an emergency raft
on an airplane between the other two
buildings so that would be the and then
on the freeway it presents a kind of
tableau like tour that this is okay like
three of you will remember petticoat
junction they'll come up from the water
tank and it's kind of like that
so from the from the university side
this is what you see and then that would
be from the freeway side and then this
these would open and close like barn
doors so it would be a kind of the
ground-floor one the black box you could
actually have it to be open to the
sidewalk in fact we were talking about
that DiLaurentis video project up at
Stanford I went there they actually do
something like that with their theater
and then the other ones do do other
things so here a series of sections you
know we have the various classrooms and
other galleries and things like that and
then you go through the the theater
itself and and you know the idea here is
that there's any number of performances
are possible there's it can be
acoustically tuned and you would you
know it it looks like a tuba and you
could kind of play it in theory so it is
a thought of as a musical instrument
also and then what happens is when
you're if you're coming from the
university you could walk underneath the
orange thing and you enter here there's
a visible woodshop other things one of
their main long-standing gallery 400 is
up here and if you're coming from the
Blue Line and from the city you come up
through the building into this space in
both cases you end up down here so like
that that's easier
there you see the theaters teared up as
they go the acoustic separation both
from one another as it's a so it's a
cast-in-place concrete building and also
to isolate it from rumbling from the
blue line just going up from the service
floor below the main floor again here's
like visible shops and would you know
fabrication shops as well as shopping
shops and cafes etc here's the entrance
if you're coming from the public you're
coming up a space like that this would
be that space for the two of the meat
and would be the beginning of the what's
the word again low B sorry Hannah
and that would be you know coming up
from across the street from the net
tower and continues up etc etc you know
this is then the medium height one and
you're looking out at the city and then
you get to the in the building looking
back at the tuba and then the highest
one and here's where you would both you
would get a view of this city and then
it would be a beacon that something was
happening for the campus okay so that's
it this is kind of a view from the
interchange I won't go into the the
various kinds of ecological features but
the three building one is a cast and
cast a kind of a tilt up concrete panels
that are lifted up into place the other
one is this kind of a steel tube that's
covered and then the other one is cast
in place concrete so when we turned it
in it was really like a presentation
booklet we didn't get deep into the skin
this is I want expand the energy piles
a couple other views google street views
of it and that's it
so the last little bit is this would be
the view from the sears tower so this is
the last one which is revisiting it um
I made the mistake when Mark Lee came
and visited my office and he saw some of
those cutouts I said you know it's a
building facade idea could just be a
building facade he's like oh why don't
you build one of those so we did so we
used it as an occasion to revisit
because we never really got very far on
the skin with that building and then we
had this base which is very very tall
and very narrow and we have this wall
that's like 30 feet by 50 feet
enormous ish like this like this full
wall with these facing these gigantic
windows with super dark tinted glass
from the 70s so even though there's this
magnificent staircase across this the
the open courtyard which has an atelier
bow-wow project you couldn't see through
it so the only time you would see this
project is pretty much the way I see
this screen it wouldn't be far enough to
be even where Todd is so we had to do it
but we had to we wanted to build a wall
there but the logic of it I was talking
about the the Seurat paintings they had
a kind of legibility from a distance
there was a crispness that you needed to
see them from afar when you got very
close there would be a second thing we
wouldn't have that Christmas here we had
to radically riri engineer it and that's
that that is another lesson so we did
first off we displayed all of these I
call these the sullied all of the funny
models and in the back you see the ones
that we did in particular for this and
then started reworking the skin and and
this was a wonderful intern in student
Makiko takasago she did this drawing and
send it this is we should do absolutely
oblivious to the Chicago School the so
called Harry who and Karl were some and
Jim not I was like we're actually
channeling Chicago
art ed Paschke so this is it and we it's
it was done anyways with soft edges we
were not interested in enhancing amore
effect but we couldn't help it because
of the proximity of it but some of the
definitions are softer so you could see
the edges in different alignments and it
would still work this thing got got kind
of reengineered and got a better color
and here's it and and these are was
telling Todd it's this model we put it
together in Chicago and put it into a
case and just today it arrived in Los
Angeles so I don't have photographs of a
lot of this but I just wanted to put it
in as a coda because this kind of work
color meets the other theme there you
see it all together and so this is that
hall that I just showed you unfolded
right if you unfold it and we imagine
what it would take to do that this is on
the other hand that hall unfolded and we
tried to figure out how one could meet
the other in which pieces we could build
these are the studies to try to get the
the soft blend instead of the hard edge
for the color so we did a lot of tests
like this this big our own mood boards
for this one and then one of the most
adorable models we've ever built some of
this big it's MDF and then the pieces
come off with little stainless steel
dowels and even that base piece comes
out so this is how we're modeling you'll
never see it like that because you can't
see through the windows you really are
kind of up against it when it happens
and so this is what we have to go
photograph in the next couple of weeks
this is an earlier version this is a
kind of mock-up of the final version on
the floor there these scattered benches
are to sit on and to hold the models
there's an earlier rendering of it
Babylonian in its construction let me
tell you composed of a series of 297
aluminum powder coated and bent panels
in three colors with a fourth color as
the background each panel is about two
feet by by five feet a little smaller
because of the cuts and the bends it's
done cut from five by tens here you see
them and they're all put together with
cotter pins with a meticulous amount of
care we didn't have another chance and
we weren't able to build in adjustment
mechanism so we just had to do
everything absolutely dead on to tiny
fractions of an inch and and it comes
together and you can't step back to
photograph it it's immersive it's quite
immersive actually there's you know get
a sense of the height of it here and
then the models were sitting in front of
it
there's the case with the friendly
little fellas there em you see the door
beyond it to give you a sense of the
scale of it bigger than the slide and
then the the last image this unfortunate
thing showed up at the last minute and
my last reference and you can google
this any fans of Mont dealed Monty
Python TV showed the blancmange from
outer space that's what it looks like
and on that very both bad joke and bad
obscure reference
I bid you adieu
[Applause]
right yeah yeah
some like
right it's you know it's interesting
it's an interesting question I don't the
they were less separate than you would
imagine in other words while we're
throwing these things around
we're separately calculating areas and
adjacent season talking to Arup about
how towers how you know is it
conceivable to stack these theatres and
things like that so there were maybe a
lot of not so much form the digital
calculation going on in order to those
little models and so there really was we
wanted to make sure that so this is a
little different than your question but
I think is kind of what we wanted to
make sure that our calculations weren't
going to restrict some strange
possibilities and something about those
working on those little models allowed
us to do it you can only do so much with
some of that stuff but they were in a
kind of concert like I say they weren't
exactly sequential but as you're
watching them you know they start to get
oh we got a model it like this this is
how the theater works and there was I
don't think we ever there was no ever
any digitizing of the models into the
into the project no it's funny that's
not something we do in the in the MoMA
project on the other hand
the Chicago one was first in the moment
was second but almost they were
overlapped some of the things like I was
a squiggle building very quickly you
know after a few kind of fun with pipe
cleaners that was an entirely digital
operation and we just went through all
sorts of bizarre boolean operations to
generate those things as I said they're
not sketches at all they're just just
trying to work this thing out fully
three-dimensional there they really came
out of you know there's a in another
lecture we've worked on furniture from
time to time and there's a chair which
we have the prototype for called the boy
chair which which is based on that this
idea of a line constantly changing
curvature and space and how to do that
so we had we had some kind of means we
had some techniques and digital tools to
do that
and so that one really went all the way
like that whereas the one that looks
like the building hugging itself that
one kind of went back and forth between
physical models and digital we do we try
to make you know it's funny the the
biennial was a is odd I mean mark and
Sharon I know well and think highly of
them that's the way you say before you
criticize him right and a mark in
particular I've known him forever I mean
he entered a month in my office when you
know he was 12 and I was 16 or something
but there's there's a kind of
conservative edge to it and I I find
that
well I take note of it I'm not a fan of
it but one of the things that in a lot
of the conferences and things related to
the venue there was a discussion of
being post digital and I remember the
first time I threw that term around was
when I first got the shot back to CyArk
about 10 years ago and it was explained
to me that this advanced at mark 2
program that was the digital program
watch what it is they said well what's
the regular and Mark 1 and they're like
no it was just not not the advanced
program I don't know great why don't we
just call that one the post digital
program my my find digital colleagues
would have none of that but what I
always meant at the time was that not
pre digital not anti digital not you
know that you actually get past it and
you just work with the kind of you know
that there's a cornucopia all of these
are all tools at your disposal and you
can actually work on it in complex ways
and and a lot of stuff I'm showing you
is unbelievably dumb like those boxes
they're put together with tape and
scissors and exacto they're not tape and
scissors our Chi Val linen tape exact
those calculations but you could have
made those long before there was
therefore a computer but the intuition
was absolutely digital we couldn't have
done it without sort of thinking through
digital effects other things are
absolutely dependent on you know
scripting and other kinds of things that
we kind of craft ourselves in our office
when when I was at the biennial and it
was a lot of talk about post digital
they meant not digital not digital and I
thought cyrix had or run with the term
when I gave it to them
hey Sara yeah was it substantially
different okay good thank you
[Music]
hmm
right yeah
right this is the funny thing is
unrelated but related I'm teaching a
seminar I first taught it last year
where we do woodcut prints by hand we
produce the wood blocks on the laser
cutter so I know I'm teaching you a
skill so if architecture doesn't work
out you can open up some boutique
printing shop in Williamsburg in
Brooklyn and produce really expensive
wedding invitations 4:03 know but it's
funny so we're you know so we're going
deep on this like printing thing know
what it was it's a little bit literal
the understanding that I mean I have a
little bit of a background my
undergraduate in printmaking lithography
and some other things so I just like it
and I know something about it but
started realizing that there was still
this thing that the effect is one thing
but to produce it you produce it through
very specific discrete pieces that don't
look like the final thing you're trying
to do as opposed to say color and
architecture we have a wall here a wall
here this one let's make this one blue
this one green or maybe we can put a red
stripe going down the middle of it
independent of it but it tends to be
like that the idea that and I think this
is again a kind of thing that technology
lets us see you could start you know
because you can you know there's a
increasing ease of just just laser cut
it whatever that would be so you could
you could suddenly achieve a complexity
that would have been prohibitive at
other times and so we just said well
what if we just kind of Miss adapt
various forms of breaking images down
that we see in printing I need to
produce a lot of those things we go
through like misusing various kinds of
kiff export tools and CMYK breakdown
they'll this tiered Photoshop stuff and
and live tracing it and and all of this
stuff and it's now that it was meant for
their mace it basically things to allow
you to print it or to web publish it or
whatever and we use it I mean what
happens is it gets a little into the
thicket what happens usually is was like
this wall the if you wanted a bunch of
holes on a wall no problem if you wanted
a bunch of dots floating in space they
all fall down it worked really easy on a
printed page with a dot printer ink jet
printer doesn't work so well in
architecture so suddenly the armature
becomes a huge part of it and how does
that not drown out the atmospheric
effect this is what we sit around
spending our time doing but it is it is
a kind of it is somewhere I thought it
was a kind of attempt to transfer a tech
the printing technology great perfect
two good questions thank you
[Applause]
