all right well thank you all for coming
I know that you know everyone's afraid
of the snow but it's gonna melt we've
got a great lecture tonight I'm really
glad to have Rene here and I wanted to
just really quick I wanted to start just
by telling a little story so the year
was 2005
the place was Tijuana Mexico - UCLA
graduate studios one led by Bob Solow
the other by Marc Lee had just crossed
the border at San Ysidro they'd come to
study Tijuana's architecture and
urbanism I was along for the ride as a
teaching assistant in marks to do now
before long our group had made its way
through the touristy bustle near the
border crossing and avenida revolucion
and headed east out past the airport and
the maquiladoras and up into the
irregular settlements that continue to
expand Tijuana's perimeter into the
adjacent foothills we studied the
vibrant vitality of those neighborhoods
the clear organization the clear
organizational principles that governed
these supposedly unplanned precincts we
sketch plans of streets and plazas and
neighborhoods and tallied an array of
building types we documented the clever
programmatic and tectonic innovations
that made these neighborhoods work so
well we also compared our findings with
equally careful study of government
planned housing that had been developed
nearby we saw that the irregular
settlements seemed to outperform the
planned housing in just about every way
now unlike so many American academic
projects abroad we didn't look at
Tijuana as a problem to solve
rather we saw it as a rich tapestry of
architectural and urban achievements to
emulate so we took our findings back to
Westwood and proceeded to work up a
series of projects which which deployed
what we learned in Tijuana on sites in
Los Angeles the studio was an
unqualified success now you're probably
thinking that much of the credit goes to
the great work of that gifted TA and
you're right that's true
but what's also true is that the studio
would not have been possible if it
weren't for tonight's guest right rene
Peralta so it was Renee who already knew
everything weeny neophytes were just
discovering it was Renee that turned Bob
and Mark on to the incredible
architecture of Tijuana his hometown and
it was Renee who met us at the border
and set up the army of field guides and
urban scholars with whom we worked was
also remained Renee who made sure we
found our way into and out of the
settlements and it was Renee who also
made sure that we we immersed ourselves
every night into what he called the real
Tijuana it involves him playing bongos
so Renee is you know he just knows
everything about that place and that
knowledge is really why I wanted to
bring him here today a little more
general background Renee is the
principle of generica an architecture
and urban design studio based in Tijuana
his work which addresses architecture
planning and landscape equally focuses
on the contemporary and future forms of
the us-mexico border region he trained
as an architect at the new school in San
Diego and at the architectural
association in London last September he
was named the herb green teaching fellow
at the Gibbs College of architecture at
the University of Oklahoma
previously he taught at UCLA Washington
University in st. Louis and Woodbury
University in San Diego
he's the author with Fiamma Montes Imola
Montezemolo Samuel oh I keep have a lien
in Spanish it's screwing me up but
Fiamma and Eddie bear tell you pairs of
aqui es Tijuana a kind of guidebook to
all those qualities we explored in 2005
he's also the editor with Tito Alegria
and Roger Lewis of this commemorative
edition of a temporary paradise
a look at the special landscape of San
Diego which was originally prepared by
Kevin Lynch and Donald Appleyard renee
has a very long and impressive
impressive list of accomplishments and
accolades which if I read them all would
leave us with very little time for the
lecture so suffice it to say that rene
Peralta is an extremely talented
architect and urbanist a gifted teacher
a formidable scholar and an unwavering
advocate for the architectural and urban
possibilities of the border region
please help me welcome Rene Peralta well
thank you I hope it's not all downhill
from here
I'm really honored to be to be here at
the Knowlton school really it's for me
is it was very I've been thinking about
it since since today he he sent me an
email and invited me to come here so
you've been stressing me out for
a few months so but I'm really glad to
be here what I'm going to show today is
the series of everything a series of
projects the things we do down there as
a firm and the things we I've done we've
done with students from Woodbury
University from Washington University in
st. Louis
etc so it's also the 20 20 years since I
found a generica so I'm not going to
show 20 years of stuff but I think
there's gonna be stuff from the past
just to let you know how we have evolved
or not I know it's up to you but but
what the work has been about and what is
it - actually you know practice at the
border region specifically on the south
side this picture is of the border this
is the of course in the Pacific Ocean
this picture was taking from the north
side so I decided it was appropriate
because now I'm studying the border from
the United States not from Tijuana for
the first time in my life so it's the
view kind of more critical view of kind
of what we've done and so what how does
it how does it look a change of its it's
like the titles of parallax it's a
different way to to look at things as
they as they change also this kind of I
chose for Kerry Sportacus is Argentine
writer as a disclaimer I have no way of
knowing whether the events that I'm
about to narrate artifacts or causes so
I mean that's going to explain a little
bit of what what am what I'm do
what are we gonna see today in all this
work and things that we do that we've
done from art working with artists we've
done of course traditional buildings
with clients and but also work with
governments academic there's always some
kind of basic conceptual framework for
the work and it has to do with kind of
the contemporary view of what the border
what the border means what the border is
today of course it's always changing
especially in climates and the climate
that we are today but one of the two
major let's say ideologies or conceptual
ideas one is from Michael deer who say
geographer from Berkeley and good friend
and Gustavo Leclerc who taught I think
knows Leclerc also studied at UCLA as an
architect from la the clerk is much more
Chicano kind of architect which is a
whole different thing but anyway they
came out a few years ago with this book
called post border city and it tried to
explain how the border has basically
been expand it's no longer just its
Demark physical demarcation but the
border has actually moved moved and what
Michael do calls the portable border
left on Tara porta-potties and for him
the border extends from LA all the way
down to Baja in this huge region
of what he calls baja alta in in this
area so it is a very interesting view of
you might say postmodern urbanism a
little bit of the a li school of
urbanism it so hunched such and also a
very interesting idea of theories of
hybridization mostly known by or mostly
written by resto Garcia thank cleany who
was a who is an Argentinean sociologist
who basically wrote the book on hybrid
cultures in relationship to Latin
America so for for dear
the hybrid city the post-motor city is
part of the topologies of the 21st
century you know according to his book
so I kind of sat as I lived there I
lived there all my life I crossed the
border most of my life you know the
other day we calculated that I spent
three years of my life waiting in line
to cross the border so I'd be cross the
port since I was going to grade school
so it is a very interesting place and it
is a very hybrid place so this is what
part of our idea of what the border is
in relationship to some of the projects
that we do but the other one is totally
a post ideology or concept of the border
which is the transporter fallacy this is
a work by a geographer his name is Pippo
Alegria
who's a Peruvian geographer who works
for the federal government think tank it
meant in in to Anna and he says that a
transporter region is non-existent so
everything that Michael dear says he
does not believe he doesn't I mean he
this detour is much more of a urban
economist
interestingly enough Tito is a student
of Michael deer at USC but he says that
there are some really interesting
structural differences between the two
sides of the border there's a
differentiating problems and practice
and planning by national planning
agencies do not exist urban problems are
now related except ecological issues so
that's kind of the only way you might be
in you might enter into the discussion
of some kind of a national region goods
and services are produced in certain
areas of the region but not consumed by
all inhabitants its participate in two
systems of relative pricing and that's
why it exists so he's talking about
differences he's talking about that the
border is actually made out of or lives
from these differences so differences
some pricings of goods for instance if
you don't have dental care in San Diego
they need to go to the dentist will you
go down to para and you could take care
of the problem for $50 right instead of
so it's the same services different
pricing of the services and these
differences is what makes this region
actually survive and become what it is
so Goods participating to systems of
relative pricing and there is
international limitations in Tijuana
only 50% of it have intents can legally
cross the border and it's interesting
because it's supposed to be the most
cross border in the world with 60
million process a year so there is this
kind of paradoxical effect of sort of
this concept that it's not this
hybridized idea that Michael deer has
dick toe is much more of a structural
sort of economist saying that no it's
the differences that make this place
interesting so we navigate in within
those two definitions in our in our work
I mean there are more of course there
are more other concepts of the border I
don't want to bore you with kind of
those concepts for now but I think these
are the two main ones that still go
around and are still very much talked
about within architecture urbanism the
arts social studies it's a threat cetera
so how do we look at the border and I
try to do this little very simple matrix
of how we worked and it's also like a
table like a preface like a little table
of context for what I'm going to show
you today
there has been some subjects that we
were interested in at least in my firm
but I can't I confuse the firm with the
teaching because they're there sometimes
the same thing so I really wouldn't
teach if I wasn't you know if we
wouldn't let me do what I like to do and
so far so far so good so we we've been
looking of course at the hybrid City
there was the first sort of ideas that
we were looking at back when we started
in the year 2000 the whole kind of
hybrid concept King was really strong in
1990s mid 1990s with there were some
very very important
almost be an ally like events there was
one called
insight which was very important they
brought a lot of artists from all over
the world to work on to work on things
about the border so the whole concept of
hybridity was really strong and we
started out with us and they had to do a
lot with social cultural programs we did
a lot of work with artists and of course
a topic was always kind of the border
then then we moved to a little other
things like sustainability and the idea
of resilient cities we looked at
ecological systems and they also became
sort of by out of a bi-national
character because it dealt with the 20
River watershed that is straddles both
sides of the border so we did some work
on those kind of ideas with students the
infrastructure city a the neil
industrial part of the work like Todd
was saying Tijuana is a manufacturing
town and it manufactures electronics it
it actually everything from textiles to
equipment for NASA and also does bio
medical equipment so any television
that's from Panasonic or Samson that is
40 inches in a bob it was or bigger I'm
sorry it was probably assembled in
Tijuana it used to be the TV capital of
the world etc etc so there is a new push
for this neon this relation of the place
and so we looked at it as a kind of what
will it do in the future for its economy
etc and then the kind of the the techno
city which is something that we recently
were thinking about and we took it about
science fiction at the border like a
little bit like Todd said that we
we got a little bit tired of trying to
fix problems and we decided to at the
end now kind of look at much more
speculative projects and there's a very
interesting history about science
fiction in Mexico which is a genre that
is it's fairly new because kind of in
the 20th century magical realism can
took over literature in Mexico and
science fiction was Class B but it was
for just these few nerds that liked that
stuff and but most of science fiction
written in Mexico comes from the border
which is interesting so we were looking
at that and that has really the science
fiction in Mexico is different than the
in America the American science fiction
is very scientific science fiction in
the United State Police oh we were
looking at things of you know the
science fiction can narrate or can we
think about a path to different
sovereignties at the border etcetera
etcetera so those kind of things that we
might look at today so the parallax and
apparent change in the position of an
object resulting from a change in a
position of the observer so I mean kind
of that sort of situation where now I'm
looking at this work from the other side
this is the first time I ever do it well
except when I was in London but I you
know I I really didn't know much about
Tijuana when I was there I is when I
came back from London that I realized
that what am I going to do with all this
knowledge that that I that I had in
London when I'm going to from a
developing country to a country I'm
still in development the instruments
were very different so I had to think
about a way to work that was different
by the way these are pictures of the
Trump's wall when it was being built
when he finally build these prototypes
and then they realized it didn't work
and we're being destroyed and these were
right across the border from the city of
Tijuana in Otay Mesa and I probably took
20 or 30 people from all over the world
to go see them journalists and become
kind of the tour guide of the city some
way or another but it's been interesting
where they put him you could just go see
him it's like going to a theme park
of this craziness so I'm going to start
with something very practical and
down-to-earth we in our office we
decided to form be part of this
organization called Esperanza speranza
Mexico or fundacion Esperanza Mexico
Foundation Mexican Hope Foundation you
might call it and we did a lot of work
for them pro bono we were at the board
when we think we is my wife and I who's
an architect as well and this was a very
very interesting time for us we've been
with this organization for 10 years and
it's just going there and really doing
with a lot of people talk about doing in
Tijuana you hear a lot of architects and
go down there and they produce these
beautiful drawings and they produce
these beautiful projects for social
housing but they end up in a museum
somewhere in the United States and you
go to Tijuana you never see em so we
didn't want to do that we actually
didn't wanted to go and and really do
the real job and see how these
organizations work this Bonanza is a a
foundation that this housing for very
very low-income people they they've been
around since the nineteen
since the 1980s and they work with
people who already have a piece of
property but have never had enough money
or made enough money to build a decent
human you know decent house for them so
it's very difficult because like says
here having property title appears not
to change the financial patterns of
families very much so even if you have a
title like you could do somewhere in the
United States where you can probably go
to a bank to get some money to build
here really it doesn't it doesn't it
doesn't work that way you have to put a
lot of money up front in order to get a
construction loan these people don't
have that so what happens is that these
properties in these areas are really
close to the city they're not in the
periphery really and so we are kind of
trying to also work with families and
not just individuals and try to build
with a system of you know self system of
building now the the government tried to
work this out in the 1990s by building
housing by building houses fixing
housing by building houses and they
built these huge tracts of housing with
no I mean basically no planning no
schools no shops city cetera and the
periphery they didn't work out by 2016
there were 100 approximately hundred
34,000 inhabited low-income housing
units in Tijuana
so people went back to the communities
where they already had social ties where
they already had family who would help
them with their kids but the school's
were better sitter etcetera and there's
a problem of abandonment right now of
these meanie very small 340 square foot
houses that were built by the government
actually they were subsidized by the
government but they were built by
by private developers so don't I mean
yeah the the market does not do well
when you let them take over social
housing like Patrick Schumacher says
that could happen but it really you know
he should go to to plan and look at this
stuff
so what's the mission to promote the
development of low-income communities
interested in sorry for then improving
their quality of life that's what it is
empower individuals so this is the
mission of the organization we're fine
we work with that and it's basically
this it's a house in saving funds where
the families put in some money and they
start saving for their new house they
are they participate in building their
own house we bring in volunteers from
all over the world to help build the
house and they only thing they have to
do is sort of be part of some of our
environmental care programs so this is
non-political non-religious it's
practically just trying to help these
communities come together as one we
don't give out any of the housing they
paid it all off in five to ten years or
less and they it's incremental housing
they actually build one unit and then
build the second unit etc so you'll see
here this is one of the units it's all
concrete block we have a system of
blocks that interlock almost like a Lego
that yes I use mortar and this way
people can actually help build it you
don't need to have any skills to
actually lay out block it makes it
easier for people to participate and
it's a slow house a lot of the a lot of
the communities that people who work in
work with this work with us
in this program are women most of them a
lot of them work in the manufacturing in
2050 percent of the labor force the
manufacturing plants are women
the reason it's really interesting if
you talk to a Korean or a Chinese
manufacturing plant manager they say
because they have small hands and
they're able to produce stuff really
quickly and so they hire mostly women to
do that so they are the ones that making
the money and they're the ones putting
in the money every week and also trying
to be able to build these houses you
know this is just some images of these
these units that are being built in
different parts of the city what did we
we do we started doing some prototypes
of these houses we started to see that
these houses were not only boxes but
they could actually have some properties
that will help them include passive
cooling that would be able to make them
be you know have better like the set to
etc so we started to help the foundation
of these kind of technical ideas for the
houses and now we're working with them
to see we start pretty printing some of
these houses with company from from
Holland called a bamboo baam group some
of these houses end up becoming mansions
from living in a little shack of wood
they after they continue in the program
and then they keep adding and adding so
it is an additive process and we learned
this this been going around Latin
America for a long time if you if you
look at previ for instance in Peru I
don't know if you know about prairie
done in the 1960s which was a huge
project about incremental housing with
designs by
Christopher Alexander James Stirling and
that was a it's kind of that same model
that we're using so it's kind of like a
you know alejandro side up polo Hannah
did not kind of invent the incremental
housing thingy actually I think preppy
was the first one to actually try to
create that kind of community and that
kind of system in Latin America so we're
kind of following the same idea you know
different types of family units and the
government gave the foundation a piece
of property so where are we are now
working on developing that small
community of 70 some houses the master
plan was done by the city and we so we
want to do is sort of design three or
four prototypes that can be printed and
therefore it starts to build these
houses in this community and in our
office also design a small community
center for that for that site so these
are projects I've done in the office
that are again the pro bono but it's
because you know there there isn't it
would be very difficult for the
foundation to actually come up with an
architectural feat
so we started you know doing some small
models of how these houses would
eventually be done and how they would
grow in time because they wouldn't be
able to build them completely so again
it's incremental so it's kind of a slow
process 3d printing technology and all
these cell technologies are about being
very fast about putting things up
together very fast but we need a kind of
slower house in order to accommodate not
only the economies of the families but
also to accommodate the volunteers who
come so we need the process to be a
little bit slower which is sometimes
these companies don't understand on the
trying to segment it is because the way
we're trying to build these communities
so these are some volunteers come from
all over the world these are some
executives that were working on this
house they gave a lot of money the
foundation and they wanted to build this
house in here in two days and of course
we said yes we can do that and they gave
all the money for the house but once
they they told us they wanted to come to
a speranza to work for a house that was
a few months before the date we started
that day so it took us two months
working so that when they would come we
could finish the house in two days and
we stayed working in the site 24 hours
they would come in the morning leave in
the afternoon come back in the morning
and during that lapse of time he would
stay at night and work and make sure
that they would have something to do you
know do some painting or try to help
build the roof but we ended up doing
this house and among some of the
participant was Felipe Calderon who was
president of Mexico
at that time well he just kind was out
of office so it was a very important
team of people that come in out I think
there's even been some students from
Ohio probably high school or students
have come down to help build houses so
this is the house they built this is the
house where they live and the small
little house I mean these are not of
course these are not great designs
they're actually just houses I mean if
you look at the conditions within how
they live which is with trash the houses
may be trash the first one they actually
now have a concrete block house with
insulation with you know electricity
that works water etc etc so it is a much
of a humble way of living and I think
that's what we were going towards and
some of these projects are also worked
with the families in order to see what
their necessities are so that's what we
did and so here's for that one here's
that this family of working-class family
who basically changed their lives for
the kids working there so this is still
we're still working with the foundation
we're trying to get some automated
construction and maybe kid of parts
maybe 3d print the whole house we were
we're talking about how to use
technology in a way that does not sort
of kick out the or move out the human
component of building this right going
back to a little bit about the office
did in 2005 like Todd was saying you
know we're a small firm in Tijuana got
nothing to do and no it's not true we
had a lot to do but
we were working I was working with a
friend Fiamma Montezemolo who's an
anthropologist she was in Tijuana doing
cultural research he's a cultural
anthropologist she was working for a
think-tank and then my friend eddiemetal
Yepez is a writer he's very critical
sort of philosopher and we got together
thinking about that Fiamma wanted to do
a project on the Arts in the city
Roberto wanted to do a book on poetry of
the border and I wanted to document the
city you know a kind of this this this
urban this informal urbanism of the city
so we got together and say why not let's
we'll do it together we'll put it
together but we're not going to write
anything just the introduction so we
decided okay sure there are no more
manifestos about cities I think they
think I would consider maybe Rennes
generic city as one of the last ones and
then we said okay let's let the city
talk about itself so we spent two years
reading newspapers thesis reading
everything that was said about the city
that the city talked about in different
media and then we made a call for
photographer or for photographs for for
friends for photographers and we
compiled all this information and put
the book together with the text in the
photographs and sometimes the
photographs would rely on the tax and
vice versa but sometimes the text of the
photographs would not coincide and that
was the idea the idea that was that the
self was kind of out to representing its
you know it's
itself the the the the the city was
talking about itself and we were just a
medium through which it did that it's
not a historical book it's only about
the condition of the city at the end of
the 20th century beginning of the 21st
century so we kind of placed it around
these books that we were looking at
during that time kind of that came out
during that time and talked about the
cities in pretty very similar way I
think Tom main selling now is kind of
similar to what we were doing for
another of our meta than did his hyper
border as well so we were trying to kind
of fit into that sort of segment of
literature about cities and was
published for Black Dog in in in London
which unfortunately I think they closed
but they really did we did the book in
two languages
he and Spanish in English and so we had
a good a a good source of money to do it
so it had three parts
avatars the first chapter which talked
about all the social cultural aspects of
the CD we had the second chapter was
desires that dealt with some cultural
aspects and dealt with issues of
religion but also prostitution and all
these other real places of the Realty
corner right and then the last part was
permutations which is really about kind
of the urban form or and so that was
served the three parts of the book and
again it was just a series of images
that looked like this so you had image
you have text you had statistics you had
all kinds of things at the end it's the
reader who would need to come up with
his own idea of what the city was about
it was a pretty open book and so we kind
of liked that about this project
I think we're due to make another one
because a lot of things have changed
since we we did this
so right about that time we were
thinking about the hybrid city this is
pictures of la Mona la Mona is no the
doll right and it's a it's in a
community by the airport so it's really
close to the border and it's in a canyon
and it's by a sculptor in 20 buildings
oh his studio is in the head his living
room in is in the chest and there's a
small kitchen in the stomach and then he
goes in through the back right and so he
lived there for a long time
and it became kind of Tijuana's Statue
of Liberty some way or another
and she's always naked and it's been
around for a long time and it first of
all nobody liked that everybody thought
it was you know first of all because it
was a very very low-income neighborhood
but now people have adopted it it's now
in the cities as part of the city's
image you'll see them postcards and
everything so it's interesting how these
things get appropriated in the urban
realm by the city so we were looking at
these these conditions in the office
speaking of artists during that time I
had the opportunity to work on two
projects that were extremely extremely
for me important the one on the right
when I came back from London I worked on
the Getty with Robert Irwin with the
artists I worked on the on the garden
for the whole year just cranking out
steel detail detailing for the for the
project and being around Bob was was
amazing you know very strong character a
very great teacher of art said that Sara
I learned a lot from him and plus that's
what my that was my also learned some
concepts of landscape architecture when
I was there and the other project is a
project that I could all collaborated
with the artist indigo Mangano Milano
came to is from Chicago you might know
him and Mangala know came to Tijuana and
he built this this piece in the bullring
that's next to the border as a what we
called it is a radio telescope of course
it didn't work it's a radio telescope
but it was called searching for the
alien and so what's next to the border
alright so I had a play on that and
Milano had put all these recording
systems on the side and would have
people come in and wear headphones and
say look you're listening at the cosmos
this is what the this is what the
telescope is receiving this radio
telescope but he was of course
pre-recorded pre-recorded music and a
lot of people thought they were really
listening to to the heavens with this
but anyway it was fun to work with him
on this also learned a lot of a thing
you go became good friends haven't seen
him for a while but I mean these
experience for me we're also very
interesting because then I can learn a
little to not be so serious about you
know some of them are especially in
Tijuana where you have to sometimes just
you know any ticket with a grain of salt
of course the border is always always
very important aspect of life there
oh not only for people who are trying to
cross the border of course but also for
regular citizens part of live is
monitoring the border part of our life
it's like monitoring snow here I would
guess you know it's like how many cars
are there I mean can we cross now or
when it's the best time to cross and
it's every day the same thing so it's
always part of their of our you know our
concept of the city and the border comes
in many ways many different styles and
shapes and it and around the border
there are many different events that
happen so it's it's not this just one
single line of metal but it's actually
the places of events as you move through
the city which is really interesting
this is a border that was the this fence
was put up during the Bush W Bush
administration and these are landing pad
landing pads from the Gulf War and they
brought them and they took the
chain-link fence out and they put these
mats in there the only thing I believe
they put in backwards because they act
as ladders so people were actually able
to climb them easier then so well but it
was the Bush administration so you know
still they still can't get it right
anyway on the other the other images are
of the families who are separated
because of the of the fence some family
members were able to cross the border
and still don't have a legal migratory
sort of condition and so the the other
part of the family comes to the border
area from very far from Mexico and they
meet in this area and they stay there
and have picnics for days just meeting
each other and eating etc and that's the
only way they could see each other
because you know both sides cannot cross
so these are really interesting sort of
events of how this you know this fence
sort of works down there
we did a project for the this is
2000-2001 we did a project for the 2.0
cultural center and extension the Dakota
Cultural Center it's not there you'll
see it's behind the trees but it was
done in the night in the early 80s it
was done by an architect paradigm in his
baskets from Mexico if you go to Mexico
City we go see a lot of the huge
government buildings or you go to the
study of CEQA which is the biggest
soccer stadium and in Latin America he
did a lot of the big modernist buildings
especially the ones the institutional
ones made out of concrete very brutalist
kind of projects and in the early seven
mid seventies late 80s he built a
cultural center sort of kind of we think
about it was like because the corner
wasn't Mexican enough we had to build
you had to bring this architect from
Mexico and sort of produces
institutional architecture and so our
idea was that we were wanted to produce
a different effect and we want to think
about the porosity of the fence we
wanted to think about another way of
portraying the project and so we built
this with design this I'm sorry we
define this museum around or inside this
sort of lattice kind of fencing that you
would see at the border or you would see
in people's houses and so it became
something familiar but it had also that
connotation of transparency porosity
that's Sarah of course we didn't win but
this is one of the projects that keeps
on giving
so we later we were invited by the San
Diego Museum of Art to do an exhibition
do actually to work on a space for an
exhibition on Tijuana art which one
artists more than twenty artists
participated and they gave us the space
that the other artists they don't want
it was a space that had a lot of windows
so you can hang art or you can put stuff
so
they gave us that corner and we thought
there was a great place to put a piece
that had to do with the competition so
we built this this piece out of
laser-cut bridge panels that mimic the
effects of the competition project it
really did not have any program the only
program was it's as you move around
what's its porosity because there were
certain different levels of porosity of
the panels and then sometimes you would
have you were able to peek and look
outside through the window through these
voids so it took it really worked out
the windows really worked out for us for
this project and it was you know just
the whole thing was made out of out of
birch plywood then then we were invited
to the Children's Museum in San Diego to
do another piece we did a bigger one
this was a children's small little
Improv Theater so the children would put
on costumes and they would add a little
play plays and we also got a big window
the the building was designed by Rob
Quigley and had this huge South window
that would actually getting a lot of Sun
and we loved that because then the
patterns would actually play around all
day they would be different so it was
also theater like in that sense that the
piece participated throughout the day
and how it kind of interactive this
space and this was a much bigger piece
that we did that but it came from that
idea of the competition as well so we
had some really nice pictures of that
really nice kind of cathedra call them
the cathedral shots you know
and so that network and then we did
another one in Santa Monica and we
recycled these things as much as we
could eventually this is the wouldn't
work anymore and we stopped the project
they're scouring this nice picture of
somebody getting married there so Lou
BCM sent us this picture hey you know
somebody liked it so much they decided
to get married there it's no longer
there it's not it wasn't a permanent
piece it was only there for two years or
three years I think so you're really
happy that people liked it so much that
they decided to do this thinking about
hybrids we were also looking at looking
at hybrids well the famous John Fenton
hybrid buildings Pam Clark um 11 was a
kind of case study for us looking at
hybrids in the city of Tijuana where you
have these constructions that are built
by traditional construction systems and
then and then you have this house that
is brought from San Diego and it's put
up on a it's put up on top of this of
this block of this concrete block sort
of structure and then you have a house
and then also looking at some of these
let's say in this from the inside
program the border the border arts
program this is a piece of metal
penalties Torrez called alien toy
identified cruising object which is a
border patrol car made into a lowrider
that sort of it has pneumatics and it
sort of starts to shake and dance and so
he hybridizes the the lowrider car which
is a symbol of protest for Chicanos in
LA with sort of again the the border
patrol car that runs across the
across the border we decided to look at
those systems look at some type ologies
and build this is a real project we had
a real client we built we were going to
build this this building this was in
2002 or three that had five stories and
had ten units and the each unit had
these parts these parts and we were
going to build them off-site and then
eventually craned them up and put them
up there and boil the building was being
built in a traditional way sort of
mimicking this kind of hybrid way a
building of the city and decided to you
know the building end up looking like
that but you know the building didn't
happen the client the client was real
interesting started because the client
went to India and he later came back and
said I'm gonna pay the project but I'm
not gonna do it because I'm going to
build a Krishnamurthy Center so there's
a Krishnamurthy Center now there in that
site so you would you know yeah that's
what what happened anyway looking at the
idea of the city again the resilient
city and I'm not gonna go a lot into the
project that's why I want you to see how
we start to work with in this context
the the other the the other Park is the
other part is these these besides here's
Tijuana we also worked on the
republication of this report made by
Kevin Lynch and Donnell Appleyard 1974
where they came to San Diego paid
$10,000 by the city of San Diego to do a
future report of where to take the city
in regards to a more sustainable
planning with more sustainable planning
practices what's interesting is that
they got on a helicopter and started
basically doing a well reviewing and
looking at at the city and they got
close to the border and realized that
well Tijuana was an integral part at
least of the landscape but also they
realized later there was an integral
part of the economy of bobaloo places
and so what's important about you know
in summary what's important about this
documents it's that one of the first
documents that talks about by national
planning at the border between these two
border cities and into 2016 with
elections we we thought that it was
important to bring it back we thought
that it was a what is important to to to
publish it again have some comments some
some new essays and and talk about
instead of walls talk about
environmental planning about urban
planning etc etc and so we reprinted
this with a Mexican the Mexican thinking
tanks and they were State University and
other organizations and yes there's a
book of that here it's a beautiful book
these are sketches by Donald Appleyard
use the landscape architect probably
made with photographs that they took on
the helicopter this is one of them this
is one of the images of the border
they're talking about how certain let's
say institutions could work on both
sides cetera et cetera it's worth
looking at it the the drawings are
really amazing how am i doing time all
right
based on those sort of ideas of
watersheds environmental planning
resilient said etc we did some work with
Wash U on can Canyon development and
some research on part of the river
system in the city decliner has a
channelized River like LA and of course
it has a lot of problems with housing
which at the end ends up people ends up
living in the different areas which are
still natural but people come in inhabit
them this is the manufacturing plants
also dump a lot of stuff into the the
only rivers that are left
developers built next to the river so it
is I mean these cases are really really
interesting yields but these cases you
see all a lot in Latin America you see
the manufacturing you see the poverty
the dirt and so how do you know how do
you work with this stuff and why she was
interested in doing they just stood here
for three years they came here three
years in work these projects and so we
tried to do some environmental planning
do some much more let's say softer
channelization of the river
reprogramming the the sort of the
landscape to also have a
program in a function so that it was
much not only it was also productive in
one way or another so this is some of
the images this is only one of many but
this is kind of the scale that we were
looking at we did with the two sides the
other side ways next to the next to the
ocean on the north side so the estuary a
protected wetland on the other sides
there's forty thousand people living on
that canyon and all the water that when
it rains on the water that comes from
the canyon ends up in the estuary
pollutes the California beaches and then
you have a bi-national problem so we
were working with these guys on how to
build this resilient sort of areas
attachments area catchments with pools
and how do you make this catchment it
doesn't rain what are they what happens
in these areas they become hybridized
because they are part of other
activities that the community can have
instead it's a drought so students learn
that nobody's going to go anywhere
they're going to stay there how do we
work with how people who live there and
how do we do that so we worked on that
for a while these are some of the master
plans that they did which was a we won
an award for it de Uli award I think for
one of these projects and urban land
institute award sustainable practices
something like that
this was interesting the this is a very
I don't know maybe it's something from
the a back there when we used to have
didn't know what to do and I remember
that Jeff would say just put something
on there you know and so this is we were
looking at the canal and says what we
can do with this canal
you know it's horrible smells bad the
water that goes through there and
there's a lot of people living in the
canal which makes it a problem and I
said let's just fill it up with solar
panels and we drew this very simple
Photoshop image of of what it would look
like if the whole thing was covered in
solar panels and we got so much press
just for that just as that one image we
were in the LA Times Fox News a lot of
papers in Mexico that I was trying to
change in the the this the Tijuana River
and they were saying would it work for
LA Gary wasn't working on the LA River
yet but it's so interesting how this is
a very simple idea just ended up
becoming a project that won a majority
and of took it over and said if I win
we'll build it of course he didn't win
but it was a project that we did at the
end we start to do some research and
what was the capacities of and the
challenges of doing this and what we
wanted to do it how we could do it what
would it do for the city what other
systems could be implemented to clean
the water that goes through there we
were looking at algae systems so it was
again not throwing out or creating this
oasis like Ellie wants to do with its
river but it's actually just making the
infrastructure perform better and sort
of hybridizing it into a solar farm
that's basically what we did and so we
did some other images very simple images
of what it looked like maybe it had some
bikeways and people can
you know go right through that there was
the algae runways raceways I'm sorry
etc etc so it started to become a
interesting project for the city where
they were taking it seriously
and we calculated that it would be a
ninety five megawatt farm that was it
was we the biggest farm in Mexico
biggest solar farm in Mexico if it
happened so it was really really
interesting that and it's still out
there in people's mind but we haven't
worked on it for a while and we continue
with these kind of these stop this
utopic ideas we we want a competition
for a Hyperloop route Hyperloop one
version Hyperloop which is now called
set out a competition around the world
where they asked people where were the
best routes would happen or what how
would they change your region if you had
a Hyperloop system and we proposed
number five Hyperloop west which was a
cross-border Hyperloop from the port of
Ensenada to the port of La Porte of
Ensenada probably two hours from Tijuana
going through the sea of the corner
picking up many factoring goods and
taking them to the part of Long Beach
and from there distribute them to the
rest of the US so we we did the project
we it was really not designing it as a
as an architectural project but it was
designing the system and putting out the
numbers making sure that worked out well
in the meantime Hyperloop one was doing
their test track in Nevada and out of I
don't know maybe three thousand entries
we were semi-finalists at the ten most
let's say probable routes for the
country here in the in the US and so it
was it was this route it was from LA
Ensenada
what's interesting because this was also
to only 16 we went to watch it to the
sea to present this project and they
told us you got
Daquan apart out because you know so
Trump had just one and they said if he
looks at we're doing a cross-border
thing you know this way and not that way
he's not you know we're not gonna he's
not gonna like it so they so we took
that that out and then we said okay
that's the second face and it will
happen later but we looked at the
advantages of having it where people
could live if they wanted to because you
would be able to go from LA to Ensenada
which takes about four hours in about 18
minutes according to the system so this
is a project we're still working on
we're working on now with Hyperloop
transportation technologies which is
another the second company working on
the on the on the technology their test
track is in Toulouse and France and my
students have here at Oklahoma are doing
a hypothetical station in Oklahoma City
which will go two percent in March to
Hyperloop so it's an interesting all
right but we we know that Hyperloop guys
these companies are just a bunch of
Engineers and a lot of them have not
even thought what the impact of these
technologies would be on the urban realm
especially in developing countries right
so we did we teamed up for this there
was an exhibition in San Diego that was
curated by Rebecca Webb who is Michael
Webb's daughter from marki Graham and
she said look I'm gonna do an exhibition
on transportation and my dad's gonna be
in it you gotta be in it it was probably
said yes you're gonna be next to you
know michael webb and and so I teamed up
with a friend of mine who is a - friends
of mine another architect and who's an
illustrator charles globe it's and we
built a little story about Hyperloop
about this this man who goes from the
center of Mexico to Tijuana and tries to
get on the Hyperloop to go visit his
grandma
la and which is the story of my the
migration story of you know of happiness
forever what happens and so the idea was
that we were critiquing Hyperloop in the
way that this guy had to go didn't know
what the Hyperloop was how was he gonna
get into it how is he gonna pay for it
because it was paid in cryptocurrency he
had to go to these guys in Tijuana who
would sell him this currency but it was
like buying illegal drugs and eventually
he made it and visits his grandma
because grandma's not even even alive he
was just taking her an upgrade for her
little pod where she now lives and so we
were just kind of having fun with this
idea about and sort of criticizing a
little bit Hyperloop and saying look you
have to understand what's the impacts
what are the urban impacts are you gonna
have in the future not only don't you
think this is just going to be a generic
system that's going to work everywhere
the same the same way so these turned
out really really great and we plan to
do a lot more of these kinds of projects
together almost done I was the curator
for the Tijuana San Diego little
Pavilion in Seoul in 2017 for the Seoul
be in LA we put together a lot of these
ideas that I talked to you about right
now which your ideas about landscape
ideas about the economies between the
border a lot of the sort of the urban
form and also the aspects of well sites
at the border the Koreans were really
interested they told me can you can you
tell us or can you show us how does it
working border how does a border that is
in piece work and because we think one
day you know we're gonna have a border
like that and and so I said well okay I
mean this is this is how it kind of
works and I it's at the beginning like I
said it works some things are relatively
the you know pretty much the same and
others are very different and that's
what makes this place interesting so we
did this exhibition in Seoul
in the DA in the sahaba building I think
it's where it was and to finish is we do
we do architecture we just finished this
house for India wanna again it was a
hard site this was for just a a woman
who was from France sorry about the
images
she's a demographer she's and she's a
scientist and she bought this slope
really beautiful property slope would be
great views of tapana but she wanted a
house in one floor so you can we tried
that and so at the end what we did is
kind of created a little plant and then
put the house on top of that plant and
created a courtyard house basically
which is good for the we decided the
reason we did the courtyard house is
because there's so many buildings going
up now around her site that she's not
gonna get any sort of good ventilation
or sunlight in the future because she's
gonna be surrounded by these tall
apartment buildings so we decided to
kind of create her own little
environment within this building and so
this is the section I mean the elevation
basically you go up to the courtyard and
you enter the house to the courtyard and
the whole house is on that on that on
that level I mean if you continue to go
up there's a roof guard and there's a
green roof garden that she also wanted
but the whole house is in one in one
level and so this is the house when it
was recently finished this is where you
come up and you go up to this courtyard
there's a huge tree now in here
and the whole house is just basically
works around this courtyard there's a
living room and then there's the kitchen
and there's the bedrooms over here so it
kind of works with its facing facing
East has some interesting very simple
house saw white concrete and concrete
floors etc we tried to we were working
with this transparent trying to work
with the stress variance that you were
at the back of the house we could
actually see through all the layers and
see through all the way to the front and
so that's what we tried to do these
pictures this is her bedroom which is
has a corner window so that's the only
thing that she wanted in front of the
house and of course she is a demographer
of scientists and she always has parties
with her fellow scientists and she
wanted it really nice huge balcony in
front of the house looking at the city
and we had a lot of issues with that
because then we wouldn't have any facade
and so how do you disobey care about can
he disappear and that's what was really
difficult for us to do not disappear but
how do you have a facade you know not
just a a balcony so we tried to play
around with some of the forms there or
the form so that the balcony at least
looked like it was a kind of a void of
something that was there and not just
you know about the balcony but it's a
great space in
so yeah we also work on some of these
projects when we can and well anyway I
think that's my last slide thank you
[Applause]
