so I really been an admirer of Kai's
work for quite some time and I think
we're really lucky to have him here
tonight to share some of this work with
us I think one of the reasons in
particular why we're lucky is because it
took me something like five years to
remember Kai's name and so the the what
I mean by this is that I remember really
specifically like around five years ago
I was at someone's house and I saw a
particular painting which was produced
by Kai and it belonged to this series
which i think is part of the history of
one organism series which kai has been
working on I remember commenting on this
painting and the owner told me this was
made by a guy named Kai Fran's and I
thought that's great and then I forgot
this pretty much as soon as possible and
then some years later I was surfing the
internet and I saw these incredibly odd
objects which was something like kind of
fossils which were made out of sand and
glue and some kind of arcane technical
process and I remember thinking that
these things here's the guy's house who
I was at I remember thinking that that
that these things were also really
incredible and I looked at who made them
and it was this guy named Kai Franz and
I thought that's great and then I again
I forgot this then for a second time and
then through some kind of really
unlikely coincidence I came across a
number of prints of these also quite
unusual AutoCAD like drawings in Germany
and I remember thinking that they were
really uncanny because they reminded me
of these peculiar sand like fossils that
I'd seen some years previously and so I
asked who made these and it turns out
that of course the drawings the painting
and the models were all produced by Kai
and so I was kind of thinking about
encountering Kai's work in this way as a
series of episodes loosely hanging
together in my own memory by a
combination of certain recurring
aesthetic coincidences in the work and a
certain amount of sort of pure
coincidence in the process through which
they're made and it seemed to me that
this is a pretty good way to introduce
Kai's work okay I think is really an
expert in making things that kind of
hang together loosely and I think now
maybe tonight you'll see that that one
way to sort of read this is maybe in the
most literal sense of that phrase
but the work because the work is quite
captivating in part because it looks
like it's always sort of moments away
from falling apart but perhaps more
importantly Kai's work has also invested
in exploring the ways in which artefacts
like digital drawings on a computer a
sandy fossil a machine and their
creators all hang together loosely so by
hanging together loosely I mean here
that the CAD drawing that I'd found in
Germany and the sandy objects I'd seen
online some years previously were part
of the same project and in fact the
drawings preceded the object and in some
sense they allowed the object to exist
but in a very strange way while the
object while the drawing was necessary
for the object the drawing was neither a
drawing of the object nor was the object
a construction of the drawing in other
words the two artifacts hung together
loosely now Kai's expertise is important
for architecture to consider
particularly now because many of our
most enduring disciplinary conventions
technological instruments and even the
legal structures and protocols of
professional practice have been designed
to better manage the looseness with
which drawings objects and thoughts hang
together now you certainly encounter
this sort of ethos in studio nearly
every day in fact it's probably one of
your greatest sources of frustration
other than your professors for example
your your 3d print doesn't resemble the
Rhino model or the the colours in your
plot don't look like the colors on your
screen in other words these are sort of
moments in which the kind of
technologies with we employ or the kind
of disciplinary protocols we use and
their sort of ethos of may mean mimesis
have broken down so I have to find where
I am the more we can imagine these
things sort of resembling each other the
happier we tend to be the more
professional we all appear to be and the
more the whole proposition of
architecture seems to hang together so
this is one of the reasons why I'm
really happy to have Kai here tonight
because his ideas the machines and
processes he designs and the artifacts
that emerge result I'll make more
difficult the ethos of mimesis that
makes what architects do seem to make
sense so much so that I don't really
have the vocabulary to describe the
relationship between these elements as
they play themselves out and his work
only to say that they hang together
loosely and in hanging together loosely
they not only suggest ways
making things but ultimately other
models of the imagination so Kai is
coming to us tonight from the Rhode
Island School of Design in Providence
where he's an assistant professor in the
experimental and foundation Studies
Program
Kai studied architecture in Aachen
Germany and the ETH in Zurich and at
Princeton University
between Zurich and New Jersey kai was
awarded a Fulbright fellowship where he
earned an MFA degree in digital media
from RISD and in addition to his
teaching at Rhode Island he's taught at
the ETH Princeton and McGill and in 2013
he was a fellow at the Academy schloss
solitude where he left some peculiar
AutoCAD drawings lying around so please
join me in welcoming Kai what a
beautiful introduction that I really
like this
I guess idea of like present and absence
and encountering the works in these
different ways really interesting so
after thinking about that a little more
but thank you very much Curtis for the
invitation and we've credibly excited
and honored to be here tonight I know
that Jeff is also in the audience here
this evening and I want to thank him for
support and guidance over the years so
it's a it's a real treat for me to be
here tonight I'm showing this opening
image as an introduction to my early
interests as we just heard from Curtis I
studied architecture at everything I own
in ETH Zurich in my undergraduate
degrees I also had some expertise in
computer science early on during my
studies I try to integrate computation
into the architectural design process
this project was an example of a
self-organized
of a self-organized building that was
designed entirely algorithmically the
consequence for the architectural design
methodologies seemed to suggest a
paradigm shift I thought the shift to
design generative systems which make
relative decisions rather than absolute
once still resonate with me today one of
the critics an architect from Madrid
questions back then if I had really
considered the building from all of its
angles in the urban context indeed I had
not for the for me the conceptual
framework had more virtue the 3d print
the 3d printed model is still around
like a little sculpture it
hovers over my toilet today here's an
early project of mine that I did in 2012
the Guggenheim New York is a series of
mechanically produced sculptures detect
sorry a machine that takes models of
canonical buildings and dip stamps into
paint over and over again on the one
hand I am interested in how the process
of additive subtraction the layering of
paint over highly prescribed described
form achieves the decay of form while
also leading to a new formal language on
the other hand I'm searching for the
moment when an object changes its medium
condition the point where architecture
becomes art at the same time all of
these works programmer ties issues of
scale as models these pieces exist on a
1 to 200 scale yes as yet as objects
they also exist on a one-to-one scale
the material properties of paint
together was the physical resistance of
gravity room temperature humidity etc
make the process unscalable bound to the
one-to-one these pieces does collapse
from being distinctly in the realm of
architecture and art into mutual medium
condition I wanted 200 to one-to-one
scale that superimposes the
representational which there was the
actual object nature within one thing it
is of course no coincidence that the
object under attack here is the
Guggenheim New York no building has ever
narrated the continuum progress and
apophysis of modernism as well as this
one my gesture the drip stays constant
and insists much like the continuous
white wall of the actual museum
ascending and expanding in upward motion
however the narrative the iterative
nature of the process
the repetitive dipping into paint
ultimately captures an entirely
different position machine s mode and
medium for tonight's lecture I went back
to my thesis statements and I wanted to
read some expert excerpts to
contextualize the next project
architecture has reached a state of
eminent high resolution this project
proposes an alternative methodology for
new resolution in architecture away from
over determined
hi-rez to new low res architecture that
operates within the grain of computation
and that activates the will of matter in
our discipline we establish formal
regularity redefine this precision and
perfection to be the norm I want to make
clear from the very beginning that
resolution and architecture for me is
not about formal definitions and
geometric complexities but rather rooted
in depth in issues of determination and
around scale in this sense the Swiss box
is as equally high-res as all as the
Giri in complexity and the smooth
slickness that the recent decade has
produced mr. fetishization of the crisp
impeccable architecture has reached has
grown to a state of total isin control
and perfection where models three 2d /
3d rendering software contemporary
computer numeric controlling
increasingly feed our desire to
determine describe everything in the end
it seems to me we use all available
technology towards one end the seemingly
high res forces the material
manifestations to work against their
nature wielding execution is reduced to
a one-to-one magnetic relationship
between the buildings and the tools that
created them or to put it differently in
our discipline our discipline has
produced a model in which planning and
design are smart and agitated and
execution remains dumb instill in this
approach to low res architecture design
determination is shifted into the realm
of execution planning design and
implementation become material but
become subject to material as Moses the
methodology that utilizes the physical
scale of materials their behavior will
and imperfection control and chance all
as means to design in low res
architecture the role of resolution and
control become immediate and necessary
collaborators the rule set of the
process here almost entirely mechanized
at times material at times material at
other times a materially rooted in the
logic of computation is intently
dependent upon increment scale and
dimension low resolution as an
arbitrariness that feels awkward as it
comes neither from the composed basis of
architectural form the legacy in
composition the legacy of composition in
painting
nor the simple haphazard randomness of
an event a table after a dinner party
instead it feels at moments awkwardly
casual in the following slides I will
text oppose my artists statement was
some of with some images of recent works
so this is now a little bit of a jump if
the earlier works that I showed or
images were from 2012 these are rather
recent plopper dual axis position
deposition system is a machine I
constructed to make objects I'd like to
think that the plopper is something like
the bad conscience of formal idealism
the kind of low rest 3d printer that
translates the smart trim and generally
wonderful numbers points lines and
algorithms into thick viscous and
cumbersome and opaque ROM in the nexus
of matter and reality for the last six
years I've been working on a body of
work centered around the pauper the
machine primarily fabricates sculptures
but occasionally also produces prints
drawings and films the sculptures begin
as digital drawings created with
computer-aided design software that are
then fabricated through custom cams
process the plopper a hijacked
architectural plotter first deposits and
then it ropes resin into onto a
landscape of sand building the
sculptures layer by layer the machine
and process are designed to critique
contemporary fabrication technology for
its pre mature relationship of the
physical to the digital of virtuality to
actually detect to actuality and of
matter to materiality while the pluckers
input virtual 3d models and CAD drawings
are regulated by control precision
perfection the machine utilizes chance
imperfection and the world of matter in
an effort to overcome determination
sometimes I think of the plops as alien
spit a reference to the serial nature
futuristic characteristic and loose
geometric qualities simultaneously the
works also read as remnants of some long
diseased civilization as archaeological
relics or as artifacts retrieved from
the bottom of the ocean the title from a
recent solo exhibition at the Bell
gallery had Brown University while still
before us after all was an attempt to
highlight and foreground this
contradictory contradictory temporal
dimension of the work it was also an
effort to render the body of work
visible as as an acceleration of today
as a dark residue of our current culture
and technologically determined existence
he is an image of the installation of
the exhibition showing a video alongside
two different plops the exhibition took
place at the list Art Center at Brown
University the building was designed by
iconic American modernist architect
Philip Johnson I was very much
interested in the conversation that
would unfold between my own work and the
brutalist architecture of the building
was materially in terms of tectonics of
the building and the relationship of the
grids and the ordering structures of the
building next to the seemingly
expressive wobbly grids that are present
in my own work I will now go back to the
beginning of the project and cast some
light on the process and explain some of
the technicalities behind the work the
project was dual access position
deposition system or plopper began as
part of my thesis and architecture in
Princeton in 2012 I appropriated a large
format printer or plotter from the
school and physically acted and so the
plotter became a plopper
here you see the machine in its first
iteration back in 2012 I added these
arms to the plotter and lifted the axis
of the printhead so that it could freely
maneuver over to buddy over every point
on a 2d plane what originally fat paper
through the machine now moved a wooden
bat these are the deposition hats a cup
holder and a funnel it was important to
me to stay rather ad hoc in this design
and here you see some images of the
actual kind of flopping process so the
machine would deposit various powder and
liquid materials I stay very much state
with sand and resin became kind of like
the most materials I used and so it
creates this what I would call
serialized landscape in the first go and
then in a second run you know the pet
deposits the resin which you know those
are the machine deposits the resin onto
the landscape of sand the resin where
they resin hits the sand it sinks into
it and freezes the form materially I'm
interested in a new hybrid condition a
strange composite sand and resin in
organic matter in a road at landscape it
here by plastic here you can see how the
plop is removed from the bat after the
polyurethane freezes and there's always
that you know a partial a portion of the
landscape I guess that will be adhered
to frozen aesthetically these initial
plots gave me some pause versus thus
what is this vice-minister for Mia what
you want from me the work seemed to
seemed as concrete as they were abstract
I thought is this concrete concrete
abstraction
I would ask today the indeterminacy of
these objects was something that struck
me the underlying serial nature
irrespective of their formlessness to me
the work threat almost as absurd or
surreal yet the surrealism I found was
immediately nullified where there
concreteness not to mention their
superficial origin at the same time it
was important to me to stay with this at
the at this time it was important to me
to stay with this technique I did not
want to invent another machine at the
risk of fetishizing the spectacle of in
the intervention or invention or even
worse the inventor
I thought it would be more challenging
to stay with what was in front of me and
figure out what was at stake
conceptually and aesthetically and one
thing I want to point out here is the
discrepancy in the work between the
virtual state and the physical state so
all of these little fingers that you can
see in this image for instance are not
part of the actual CAD drawing there's
literally like happen as a byproduct of
the process where the material kind of
runs out of control in this series I
plopped the same drawing eight times
under the following condition for each
production the scale was changed ranging
from 1 to 50 to 1 to 2,000 the CAD
drawing was scaled without loss of
clarity or information no abstraction
was made together as a group the
manufacturer works next to each other
seemed to fabricate something like a
data ask understanding of scale and so
this is the cap next like two or three
slides a little bit difficult for me to
talk about because you know sort of time
after Princeton where I was out of
architecture school and I really wanted
to work kind of contextualize to work
more in the context of painting I think
I now look back at these works where I
started using kind of colored pigments
within the resin and I don't think it's
my strongest body of work so I think
there's a lot of problems with them no
no problems a lot of problems with them
but at the same time it was important
for me to make that body of work in
order to arrive at somewhere else so
maybe that's why I'm showing it one
little thing I want to point out this if
you look at the mid that the label here
the materials is something I kind of
frequently do what we do in an
exhibition to kind of acknowledge maybe
the digital and the machine as part of
the kind of like material conditions off
this some pieces became calibration
pieces if you look at this one for me
that's interesting to see like the
difference between a vertical line a
horizontal line vertical lines kind of
just happen to be dots that connect
horizontal lines become perfect simply
has to do with how the machine is built
on one axis the bat moves on the other
hand the printhead moves and then
kind of greenish lines as a diagonal
line where the two systems collide other
works manufactured total abstractions
welcome where the complexity didn't
allow the machine language to read as
clearly this is the same drawing
produced twice and here I was interested
in controlling the indexical marks of
the shifts when the material takes over
so if you look at the cat wrong in this
I don't know if you can see that but
there's essentially there's no
horizontal lines for the disposition but
how these button centrally makes this
the grid and kind of like forms the
structural integrity of this piece
there's these little valleys that you
can see here so like whenever you have
two small mountains that come together
to form a valley when the saturation
point has reached the resin just kind of
like sings along so it was a way for me
to kind of like in certain ways
undermine some some of what the the
other plops maybe were successfully
doing after you long after a year-long
residency at the academy schloss
solitude in stuttgart I published serial
nature the book that critically examines
my practice and work the work includes
the book includes five essay
contributions that aim to unpack my work
I've read of workings and conceptual I
view the workings and the philosophy of
the machine and alignment was
contemporary movements such as post
digital conceptually identified with
artists like Jodie and Oliver Larrick
whose work engages in a digital media
discourse however something that sends
out in the appearance of the works that
the plopper creates we noticed that the
plops look like they're art they have a
strong aesthetic focus or presence their
appearance as consequence or art art I
would say could easily be dismissed at
the plops greatest weakness weakness
marked him back a balloon balloon
berlin-based philosopher addresses this
in this contribution titled diagram
gesture riddle bone the plopper as a
follows a fickle machine in my recently
published book so I quote Martine on
this one but the plops not only grinds
against grind against our human
excitement about our grand technical
ability to construct and fabricate but
also against our belief in our faculty
for deep and
sentiment from their appearance the
plops seemingly tried to look like their
art maybe like paintings or objects of
abstract expressionism these had been
part of the great antithesis of the
wonderful story of techne construction
in mathematics and control the story of
deep human power of sentiment and its
artistic forms of expression and poesis
if we want to deceive ourselves in that
direction we could see the plops as
almost human-like soulful inspired
beings whose handless bodies try to form
gestures to tell us everything about the
profundity of human life and sentiment
yet this desire is nullified this desire
for and if identification is nullified
by the spiritless and utterly
superficial origin the kinship to the
landmarks of human expression is itself
only a very superficial one they are the
contingent product of a stupid machine
of stupid numbers the spiritless machine
and the physical contingencies of the
surroundings at RISD where teacher in
the Foundation's department I like to
integrate technology in my courses in
unorthodox ways so that students
immediately question and challenge the
meaning of use of a particular software
technology for instance when I
introduced unis to Rhino a 3d modeling
software I usually give a very brief 15
minutes introduction to the user
interface and the program's
functionality I then bring in a life
model and continue with 3d modeling from
observation I give instructions that sit
somewhere between a software tutorial
and a classical life drawing session
create a new layer and use the polyline
tool only to draw a contour of the
figure or draw a random shape use the
copy tool to work out the shading but
duplicating this curve this playful and
in certain ways impossible tasks that
the students are confronted with
instantaneously challenges the
underlying mathematical bones of the
software and its working environment it
also confronts the difference of
virtuality in the nature of diagrammatic
space in the cat environment opposed to
the actuality of space a physical space
in real life an increase in is central
to my studio to the studio but also my
practice
there's an element of data in this
approach to technology in this
assignment there is also present in my
work eventually I became a bit skeptical
that the palapa seemed to be producing a
kind of medium specific body of work
almost a modernist fashion a plopper
being a print maker was an attempt to
challenge this instead of fabricating
the machine here the result of these two
prints in both cases the same cat
drawing a new drawing of a human figure
is fed into the machine the left shows
the print when the needle is attached
was a lace the right when it was
attached by a wire in 2014 it's gotten
to a point where I was frustrated was
the fact that I would create the initial
drawing for the machine I was interested
in questioning motion questioning
notions of authorship was the work for
me to create the seat was operating in
opposition to this as I remained the
author the sole author throughout I it
also seemed old-fashioned because the
work would follow the lineage from idea
/ sketch or drawing and making to object
or plop the cat compositions for this
piece referenced test patterns and
structural compositions from common 3d
printing paths architectural II I'm
interested in this as an extension of
high rationalism and material honesty
celebrated by modernism and the
International style in a painterly
context I would discuss this as a
continuation of a discourse around anti
composition
and this work you know I want to say was
for me a seminal work on many levels you
know it was the first one where I used
different types of sand together and
kind of this combinatorial game of the
same panel plop with different types of
sand so you know that was indeed due to
the kind of making the work was the
color plops and coming out of that and
overcoming that to a certain extent so I
think like things that didn't work so
much was the minute was the work that I
make was the pigment I think started to
work here but also then challenging this
kind of like initial seat drawing a
little bit more was it was a big step
for me this work particularly resumes
resonates with me for me this work
particularly resonates with the idea of
the Anthropocene these semi an author
artifacts my week as facade elements on
one scale can also be read as urban
structures on another the part-to-whole
relationship here oscillates between the
five panels that resemble the work and
between the individual grains of sand if
there is a tension in the seams between
these panels and the granular
granularity of the sand particles then
similarly I hope that the piece as a
whole operates as such a seam between
the viewer and our natural and built
environment another attempt to undermine
the authority of the cat drawing here
the cat drawing drawing is exposed to
virtual gravity in a computer simulation
prior to fabrication and they're kind of
like the blurry stuff that you see in
that it's just the actually the numbers
of the paths so kind of like how the
machine would read that drawing
essentially I was inspired by the
process if before the work stayed clean
and computers and perfect in its dairy
chromatic state named me the digital
drawing and things that aren't messy
only in the physical realm then here I
attempted to break this distinction than
hierarchy and hierarchies almost in a
kind of for-loop fashion I try to
replicate what is happening in the
physical state of the work in the
digital condition using the same logic
for its distortion gravity and material
behavior
so this is an example of one work where
the catch was that was fabricated
without the gravity so just a cat
drawing and then this is essentially the
same exact cat drawing but exposed to
gravity so you can see how you know it's
hanging through and then of course in
this case it's installed on the wall and
the virtual gravity happens to align
with the with the actual gravity in real
life so yeah similarly in this say this
serious actually that drawings for this
were generated by a little script that
would make essentially like an
orthographic drawing randomly in one
certain area and then I'd kind of
exposed that same drawing to four times
to gravity and plop all four of them in
an effort maybe to produce no I I'm not
sure and I haven't really found that
exact word and it goes a little bit to
what Curtis was saying earlier I'm not
sure if it's versions but maybe there's
something about them as deficient bodies
that kind of like I'll try to allude to
something else
now in this case it's clearly no longer
just the kind of like initial cat
drawing but maybe something else in 2016
I wanted to dissociate myself at least
temporarily from a studio and the tools
and machines I was working with
unofficially or informally I call this
body of work
Keller Const basement art I locked
myself up in my mom's basement in
Cologne initially I thought it would be
fun to work with the same materials that
I had already been working with was the
plopper to produce a kind of
conversation it made a series of
small-scale sculptures like this one in
this case this is called individual and
I found myself sculpting by hand
struggling with the materials as the
resin hardens I tried to take control
over the form the viscosity changed too
rapidly to model the mixture would tear
dust and sand would get into between the
parts and I was trying that I was trying
to adhere it was terrible this one is
called boots this one is called Moebius
worst
in a second step ident 3d scan to the
small sculptures this one this movie is
worst to digitally processed here as a
print from the 3d scan and finally this
pace piece which is called sleeping
algorithms in a last step I used the
digital counterparts of these original
sculptures to get the 3d printing pass
that a common 3d printer would use to
replicate the form common 3d common PLA
printers print out rafts as a foundation
that separates the object being printed
from the bat in the machine this is the
geometry of the raft for sleeping
algorithms I like that I like that these
objects are kind of kind of by-product
purely structural in their compositions
but also that they resemble only a
shadow of the actual object that is
being printed I also find potency in the
named raft
this is raft for sleeping algorithms to
make this I projected the pathways and
layers of the rafts onto onto the ground
I used them as instructions or plants to
mimic what the plopper would do only
this time I did it by hand initially I
completely failed in doing so so I try
to practice lessons in 3d printing one
through four rafts support infill and
other shown here are excerpts from 3d
printing compositions they don't amount
to an object or form there are mirror
fragments I used them as lessons and
score in order to get into the rhythm
10 11 or 13 times repeatedly I would try
to hand plop them
and so this is just showing the process
when preparing the bath actually that's
actually the thing the fans over two
different types of leveling the bad
and then this is where the fun starts so
you see the project the drawing of the
3d printing path to me trying to flop it
this was later after I practiced all of
these but the lessons in Sweden country
just fast forward in the layers done
comes another layoffs and
then another layer of resin and I want
to say that the size for this I kind of
like had to break them up so this is
actually three part piece that I broke
up because of their kind of like
physical I guess limitations of my
and then ultimately like the last layer
but you get the idea the exhibition in
Berlin ultimately included all four
aspects of the work the original
sculptures the prints of the models the
raft drawings and the raft sculptures
which I laid out directly on the ground
like this one raft for the one purchase
and waddles and I want to say also was
this last these last kind of like flat
panels for me that was a little bit of a
new territory to try out something kind
of like a little bit more in space
before I would say like being
self-critical a lot of the plops kind of
too often happened to be on the wall and
another aspect of that was the kind of
like purpose fall like the flatness I
was really trying to like dim down there
maybe like some of the formal excitement
he is an installation shot of a recent
piece titled purling grid the formation
of the sand landscapes in this work is
determined by a purlin algorithm a noise
algorithm that is commonly used to
simulate natural phenomena and computer
graphics in this piece I was interested
in taking this digital procedure used to
emulate nature and returning it to the
physical realm Perlin noise is a
procedural textual primitive the type of
gradient noise used to increase the
appearance of realism in computer
graphics the function has a
pseudo-random appearance yet all of its
visual details are the same size
synthetic textures using Perlin noise
are used in cgi to make
computer-generated visual elements
appear more like natural by imitating
the control random appearance of
textures in nature objects effects of
application include surfaces fire smoke
clouds but also terrain and vegetation
by now these images have become
ubiquitous in certain ways they are the
very grain of computing of computations
idea of nature
and so here you see in a way like the
Perlin noise algorithm returned back to
the physical realm in its material
condition another aspect I also with
this work is that it became freestanding
so big step for me was to kind of use
this metal framing and kind of like plop
it and then put the metal frame down and
then keep plopping so that the structure
would essentially grow around that steel
frame another interesting phenomena is
the negative landscape or image that is
produced when the plop is removed from
the bed of sand I'm very much interested
in the split that takes place at this
very moment this is an image this image
shows the leftover trace off of what's
left after the plop is taken out it
becomes a shadow of the work the plot
then resurrects becomes a kind of temper
a deficient body this interplay of
present and absence between the cat
drawing and the fabricated work and
these two somewhat complimentary but
deficient landforms to me destabilize
the objecthood of the works as such
another aspect of this is the fragility
of these works whenever I handle them
I have some traces of sand on my hands
the ephemerality is something that I
actually would like to explore more this
is the most recent version of the
plopper in my studio I built this
specifically to make some monumental
plops some of which you have seen
earlier this is one of them
seven-by-twelve feet one foot deep about
600 pounds heavy I wanted to push the
work to the limits purposefully I forced
this piece to the point of breakage
testing its structural integrity I love
how these two pieces come back together
the reflective moments that you can see
in here are imprint of the ground where
the resin seeped through the sand I like
that effect that I like the effect that
they have and the difference that they
produce so on one hand you get that the
imprint of the ground or the which
actually I would argue is more of an
absence of that ground plane and I very
much like that kind of like that removal
and kind of like back and forth that's
happening there that almost renders the
work more as a
mmm kind of result of a subtractive
process then an additive but then also
just on a kind of like I guess like when
you observe the work I think where it's
cast against the ground you get this
very harsh surface immediately reform or
object in the other parts you don't your
eyes come kind of continues and it's may
be hard to see in these but your eye
continues to like move around you never
rest and so there's something about that
kind of like refusal I think to kind of
like form a boundary or a surface that I
think I really like that tension in this
in this work particularly alright second
part bear with me this is not comedy as
long
algorithms and expectations science
experienced a revolution in the 70s when
bottom-up thinking challenged the basic
methodologies away from hypothesis that
rest and approval or disapproval to the
effects of emergence cellular automata
are an example of this they have been
studied immensely above all from the
simplest type of a cellular automata is
a binary nearest neighbor one
dimensional automata I would like to
walk through those briefly and explain
the underlying system in a given row of
cells there's something that everybody
knows already okay
otherwise I would have to skip forward
in a given row of cells cells can either
be dead or alive on or off one or two
black or white so the same based on the
neighboring three cells that we see
highlighted here in white the system
then will determine whether or not the
cell in the next generation here
highlighted in gray whoops will be alive
this is called generative logic this is
an example of a rule set we see that if
all three cells are alive so if you look
at the kind of thick table on the bottom
the current pattern if it says one one
one all three cells are alive this cell
would be dead only if the cell on the
only if only the cell on the light on
the left is alive in the fourth pattern
so we see one zero zero then the cell
would be then the cell would be alive
etcetera etcetera so you can imagine
this and when you now start and it's
always the question how do you start
with that first generation that there
always needs to be a precedence for this
right so in this case if you start with
just one cell that's alive in the center
of this long row of cells or here pixels
and then kind of like map this out
compute out how the next generation will
be the image that you will get is this
and so what's interesting about this
what's this what's interesting kind of
liked about this is that it kind of
shifts in a way to like an observation
of this phenomena or a study of these
phenomena so we see obviously there's
like larger patterns that extend out of
this like three or four neighborhood
kind of like community that's I think
something interesting you see also the
repetition that's taking place on the
left etc etc so now when you change the
outcome of these so again we have the
same start combinations obviously oops
they can't be different we change which
composition or combination creates what
the image that you get is an entirely
different one again you get these visual
patterns in it that could be studied
this is I think always the point where
like it's supposed to get a little
spooky because then you're like whoa
this also exists in nature but
I think it's cotton it's more funny and
in spooky and of course we could also
imagine that this happens in a two
dimensional plane so an example of a two
dimensional cellular automata for
instance you have a tumor start with a
two-dimensional grid of cells and then
you would always look for every cell so
here highlighted the kind of cell that
we look at is a blue you look at the
surrounding eight neighbors and then
count how many of the neighboring cells
are alive and this is Conway's Game of
Life and so in this you would then have
the generative logic with three simple
rules a cell that is alive itself that
has exactly three neighbors doesn't
matter where there are would be reborn
in a cell that is that it has exactly
two of or two or three neighbors will be
will be newborn all other cells die and
so you would apply this to every cell on
the grid without outputting them
immediately but just calculating whether
or not they will be on or off in the
next generation and then do that and
this is called Conway's Game of Life
from 1970 so this is an example again
let's say we have this dart combination
this would be the following generation
that this that this composition maybe
that's not the right word creates this
is the next et cetera et cetera et
cetera so what you see when this runs
and usually of course this would run
over a computer screen very very fast
byproducts of this are still life in
other words static objects that
reproduce themselves Oscillation objects
sell combination set or patterns that
jump between two or more stages this is
another example of more complex I guess
oscillation objects these are space
gliders that walk around and across the
grid this is a more complex pattern that
would always reproduce itself actually
producing kind of like infinity because
this would just go on forever
and so in my own work I've explored
themes of emergence and the relationship
of encoded information and instruction
intensely history of one organism 25 by
33 is what I would call an algorithmic
painting the act of painting here is
entirely dumped down deprived of human
agency in the execution of the work I
drop spoonfuls of paint onto a wooden
board
I literally reenact the game of life
following the instructions of the
computer simulation of Conway's 1970
game of life for every cell that's alive
I drop a spoon of house paint when
generation when a generation is complete
the paint dries afterwards I complete
the next generation what takes seconds
to compute takes me many months to
execute to paint via this process means
to manage paint the question is no
longer what or how to paint but maybe
how to cope was paint history of one
organism is made from simple house paint
and a plain wooden board my choice of
material eludes to the everyday the
common the banal the Statham of a
mundane almost an elementary material
language extends throughout my work can
we think of an attempt over alleged Zito
and I think that's actually something
that Jeff maybe put in my head as a as a
thought too
reckon was this in 2013 I completed
another history of one organism the
collector was interested in in the first
painting instead of shipping the work
over from Germany I thought it would be
would be conceptually more interesting
to execute the instructional PDF again
oops
I will also admit that the paintings are
rather heavy and so here you see just
some photographs of that second version
of the painting of course in close
observation the pieces are by no means
identical reproductions they appear more
like twins twins that grew up in
different parts of the world maan raced
in Germany that they can take German
paint the other one up raced in southern
New England nurtured by Americans in
paint it's just an entirely different
process and it's something that I maybe
didn't expect but actually I really
liked in the end after all that it's
just another kind of like parent
parameter like law the type of the type
of house paint dreaming the dispositions
forever here it's like acrylic paint
another way of looking at the same
system instead of being exposed to the
actual organism in motion for this piece
only the computer experiences the
organism through its computation I am
given a record of the system of the
system's accumulative life / death
permutations which I hammer and inscribe
into a flat sheet of aluminum this was a
way for me to question the correlation
of physical labor at the human body and
orders of execution under a certain
material condition this is now 2015-2016
these four works are part of a series of
similar argument with paintings and I'm
also showing them to kind of like social
images of the process
I guess all four are reenactments of the
game of life again all four have the
same initial start condition at the
beginning their diagrams are identical
however as you can see they have
different orientations and angles in
space for me this was an effort to both
acknowledge and of simultaneously
overcome gravity
as a totalizing force and condition it
is something I took from the gravity
simulations that I showed earlier was
the plops so this is just an image of me
in an assistant working with them you
see the kind of projection of the PDF
you know sometimes I'm just working with
myself is look at if I'm on my computer
and so we would literally take spoonfuls
of pain and for every cell that's alive
activate that cell yeah so this image
capacitor captures the gesture a careful
drop deprived of agency and this isn't a
kind of an to me I think like about 80%
done at the time and I really wanted to
push at this point to work to its limits
I think at this point every painting of
these four had about 20 over 22,000
drops of paint so it's literally like
it's bathtubs of paint that I'm like
dropping over the course of 18 months
another aspect was the size this is four
by four feet again I liked it because of
the kind of like default nurse of it
it's just like a plywood sheet cut in
half but also the fact that it's like
you know kind of like obviously goes
back to the human body and how much I
can do how much I can reach etc the
duration and the impact of on the
everyday this series took about 18
months to complete and then the final
works the normalizing gesture of when I
hang them vertically is important to me
the titles here indicates you can see
this on the bottom left indicate the
vector of the surface normal of the grid
or plane in other words the the works
orientation or boards orientation in
space doing the making so there was a
it's really hard I think to see probably
in these images Phillip through them but
you know this one was much less tilted
so it's almost has more of a chest
coming out so it's much more optimistic
whereas this one next one seems to
really kind of like a certain sadness
that comes with it I guess and you can
see the impact of gravity and the
spatial orientation keep smiling in
terms of the titles this one is an
outlier with a bit of black humor it
shows this title to allude to the
endurance of the work it also was a
silly way to entertain myself or
maintain sanity I chose this but this
particular pattern or accumulative
composition as in the PDF or start
combination at least in part because I
noticed and liked the grotesque clown
like smiley face in the negative space
of the work it also see adults it is
also somewhat a friendly smile at the
critic I refer to in my first slide did
I consider this from all sides
and you can see it on the sides other
you know the pharmacies kind of like
still act house drops down escapes maybe
the canvas okay
to conclude I wanted to show a few more
images of yet another series of game of
life paintings that I'm currently
working on this time they are matte
black a decision that seemed somewhat
counterintuitive I would almost say not
my own that I have heard actually also
that it's not really like what the work
is about but I did this because it
seemed like a digital move I just
thought it's kind of funny it's like
changing the fill color of a shape and
illustrator like that was one aspect of
it or maybe I liked it precisely because
it was a site where steps sideways steps
and not a step forward you know maybe a
more logical within the system or kind
of like work would have been to like
choose the size of those change the size
of the spoon or something like that or
do a series where I used like five
different brands I don't know you know
but so I really like that idea of like
kind of like staying stagnant was this
and there's like doing this sideways
step and now making this like blacks
here so it was also this has started
this in 2016
still working on them did the white ones
seem so optimistic you know there was an
element where also yeah I yeah
hard to photograph yeah yeah what these
I feel like this photograph better than
the white ones oh yeah well that's true
well that's like this is yeah a little
bit more scary imagining the black and
the white paintings next to each other
it was indeed also it was indeed also a
wing at the binary determinism that
inspired me to make this work so that
was another kind of aspect of why to
make them black you know yeah the it's
wooden board yeah still the same wooden
board thank you yes
or media misinformation seems like
these are made
yeah
so I haven't thought about the the
plopper or that project so much as like
a simulation of 3d printing it could be
like an interesting one so like I want
aspect of me reading that the question
is to see whether or not in the end I'm
just 3d printing I don't know I don't
know I'm not sure I don't I don't I
don't haven't had that issue so so much
was the work for me that I felt like am
I just doing the same its I still feel
comfortably that this is a critique of
3d printing so that's like one aspect
maybe another aspect of simulation this
is probably not what you're getting at
is but you know I was saying earlier
that the plops they have that's such a
strong formal presence or like it's
weird to me that even though I feel so
close to artists like Jodie that Lara
are hackers and they're working a very
different kind of like output or medium
or something like that
that in the end like the pubs that look
like art and so there's that maybe
that's the aspect of simulation and you
know I mean this shift six years so a
long time I would say initially you know
part of the critique was to like
actually like be interested in like
these machine produced forms that
actually have like a phonological
presence or like it's just like a
material presence not like the 3d print
of such a stupid objects or such a like
a material and I mean I love the
potential perversity conceptually of
that but at the same time they're just
you know what I mean like this is like
shitty PLA plastic just like maybe works
in the kind of like representational
scale and it's a model or I mean it's a
prototype but you see to do something
but overall it's a pretty dumb
technology the produce is pretty dumb
aesthetic
I think what pretty dull maybe
aesthetics so at the same time looking
at this this art art thing that I was
mentioning you know so like sometimes I
feel self-conscious about this and I'm
like if somebody walks into this
exhibition do they I just think this is
just like a complete like modernist body
of work in certain ways like building up
this like whole body of work trying to
really go deep this I would say it's
like it's a little old-fashioned and so
I'm self-critical of that you know and
but at the same time then you know I
kind of go back around and this is where
the element of simulation comes and I
really like this idea of kind of like an
implosion
so rather than like kind of like just
completely like doing something
completely different like overcoming
modernism and just not doing like
paintings anymore I think I was more
interested in the kind of like subtle
perversities so I don't know if that
goes to simulation but now I didn't talk
about the simulation of the cat drawing
but
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
patience
was always
and also
it's a season
[Music]
yeah I wouldn't want to say that that's
like that that's my project but
definitely you know yes a lot of those
things I would say are true and are part
of that you know it's a removal of the
source it's you know what moments when
and I didn't show this tonight but I
when I take a 3d scan of one of the
plops and kind of like we turn it into
the digital kind of condition and it
becomes just like index landscape that's
like full of marks on top of these marks
and it's exactly exactly exactly that
for me you know there's an aspect of
where I guess it's a removal of the
source it's a removal of the object code
in this case you know to not just always
end on the plop but actually kind of
like producer certain hacking of it or
something kind of like undermining of
that or something like that I don't know
if that makes sense
[Music]
[Music]
and that seems to be a good trick
[Applause]
